---
title: Mothers of the Digital Age&#58; A Critical Editorial Response
lname: Anglin
fname: Alicia
email: anglia1@mcmaster.ca
image-description: Lauren Cierzan’s Self Abuse II
---

In the winter of 2018, *The New York Times* published an anecdotal opinion piece
called “Rediscovering My Daughter Through Instagram “. The article was written
by journalist, Helene Stapinski and is a piece that can easily get lost amongst
the award-winning, politically charged and influential writing that the
newspaper giant is internationally known for. It may be overlooked by many since
it isn’t uncovering a major flaw in digital culture today or highlighting a
well-known international issue. This article is just a short, touching personal
story highlighting one of the positive effects of social media. Stapinski shares
how Instagram actually helped to *strengthen* her relationship with her teenage
daughter rather than fracture it further.  Though this article is fascinating to
me on a deep level and highlights an important perspective of social media that
I had not thought of before, I believe that it fails to address some of the more
prominent, negative side effects that can arise when one actively develops a
digital self on social media.

The uniqueness of this article lies in Stapinski’s ability to look at social
media on a minute scale through the lens of an interpersonal relationship. This
perspective was refreshing to read since many individuals and journalists who
critique social media often speak about its effects in broad and inaccessible
terms. Stapinski emanates empathy and humanity with every word within her
article as she connects to her target demographic: mothers of the digital age.
 She begins her article with a statement that is meant to sound universal and
undisputable: “few things are more painful than loving a 15-year-old girl,
particularly when she is your child.” This preface sets up the tone of the
article incredibly well as Stapinski goes on to explain the nature of her and
her daughter’s relationship. She illustrates the experience of a mother grieving
her teenager’s transition from childhood into young adulthood: Stapinski yearns
for the nights where her daughter, Paulina, needed her presence to fall asleep,
begged for hugs and kisses, and told her every detail of her days at school. As
a 15-year-old, Stapinski explains, her daughter wants nothing to do with her, is
most comfortable keeping the details of her life private, and begs for
independence. At the peak of her hopelessness about the fractured relationship
with her daughter, she learns about her daughter’s popular photography account
on Instagram; racking up over a thousand followers, Paulina shares intimate
black-and-white and coloured photographs of her life. She exclaims how finding
her daughters account and seeing her stunning photography helped her to feel
connected and a part of her daughter’s life again; making her feel rejuvenated
by the beauty of their lives once more.

 

What initially drew me to this piece was the fact that it was written from a
mother’s perspective. I have an incredibly close relationship with my own
mother; therefore, we have had many conversations about technology and the roles
it plays in our lives and our relationship since my early youthhood. My mother,
similar to Stapinski, also cherishes my photography and loves to see the world
through my individual vantage point, sometimes urging me to share the
photographs I take with my peers on social media. However, unlike Stapinski, my
mother has had a very tumultuous relationship with technology and social media:
she sees it as a more negative presence in the world than a positive one. In our
conversations about technology, she often emphasizes the fact that there is no
true privacy on the Internet. She feels as though there is a certain level of
danger in having a public Instagram account, sharing your banking information on
multiple shopping websites, or having conversations with strangers in the
comments of public social media posts. Even though she isn’t on any social media
apps at the moment, she *has* been on them before and prefers living without
them; the only connection she has with the Internet currently is streaming
services, such as YouTube, and other various news organizations that keep her
informed about politics and entertainment events. With her off social media, I
have found that she is much more present in every interaction we have. From
personal experience, I feel as though phones and social media are a constant
barrier in living every moment fully; friends and family would rather check
their notifications or take a photo of us and put it on their story than live
it.

 

Relating back to Stapinski’s article, something that initially piqued my concern
was that there wasn’t a clear idea presented of how genuine Paulina’s digital
self is compared to her real life. Stapinski, as she scrolls through her
daughter’s Instagram feed, is clearly taking every photograph at face value as
she truly believes this is directly how her daughter sees the world. However,
there is no way of proving whether or not the photos Paulina puts on her
Instagram are wholly representative of the way those moments looked and felt
like in real life. As we have talked about in the course, in the rising age of
digital photography, photo manipulation has become increasingly more popular and
even harder to detect. Susan Sontag’s 1977 essay, “In Plato’s Cave”, which we
discussed in class, touches upon the idea that, in society, photographs are
considered to be undisputable proof that any event has happened. Sontag explains
that photography is as much of an interpretive and manipulative medium as
painting or drawing since the photographer has complete control over the
lighting, facial expressions, and composition of the photograph that will elicit
the intended emotions or message that they want to convey. In Stapinski’s
scenario, I fear that the Paulina she sees and connects to online is in fact
just another version of her daughter that is not fully authentic. I believe that
the best way to get to know someone in the digital age is through real life
conversation and contact, not through filtered versions of humans on the
Internet.

 

In conclusion, for many mothers and parents raising teenagers in this current
era of digitization and social media, there can be a lot of barriers that have
the potential to weaken the relationships with their kids. Helene Stapinski’s
article highlights this phenomenon by sharing the intimate struggle she had with
reconnecting with her 15-year-old daughter and how Instagram helped her become
closer with her teenaged child. Stapinksi’s story is touching and a refreshing
perspective on social media; however, it brings up the issue of trust and the
digital self as well as the other overpowering negative effects of the Internet.
Even though social media can be a great tool for identity formation, it may be
worth exploring whether it is helping connect you to the world or pushing you
further away from reality and your loved ones.


## References

 

Sontag, S. (1977). In Plato's Cave from On Photography. New York: Farrar, Straus
and Giroux. p. 3, 24.
http://sites.uci.edu/01807w14/files/2014/02/SontagSusan_InPlatosCave.pdf

 

Stapinski, H. (2018, December 8). Rediscovering My Daughter Through Instagram.
https://www.nytimes.com/2018/12/08/opinion/sunday/parenting-instagram-adolescence.html.
