---
title: Amazon Fires&#58; Real Photos, Fake News, and a Warped Reality
lname: Barnard
fname: Megan
email: barnam1@mcmaster.ca
web:
image-description: Top 3 of the most popular photos used to show the Amazon fires of 2019, all of which do not as they were taken several years ago, Via&#58; The Telegraph
bio: Megan Barnard is a third year McMaster student  studying Communications and Multimedia who lives in Toronto, Ontario. When not in school, she works as the transportation director for a day camp. She has accepted an offer to study abroad at Deakin University in Melbourne, Australia for her second semester of third year. Megan has a passion for photography, nature, animals, food, and coding.
---

The Amazon is the worlds largest tropical rainforest covering over 5.5 million square kilometers and is home to thousands of animal species and millions of species of insect species (National Geographic, 2019). Also referred to as “the lungs of our earth”, the Amazon is often credited with producing around 20% of the oxygen on the planet (Chokshi, 2019). Every year, the Amazon experiences a wet and a dry season. During the dry season the Amazon catches fire naturally but is significantly worsened by farmers who burn parts of the forest to create room for farmland. Farmers use a slash-and-burn method when clearing a specific area of land in order to try to contain the fire but unskilled farmers often accidentally cause wildfires. This year, a large number of fires have been burning in the Amazon from January to September as a result of a harsher dry season (National Geographic, 2019). A massive awareness campaign for the fires started and has grown on social media under the hashtag #SavetheAmazon with celebrities and politicians voicing their concerns. When viewing content shared of the Amazon rainforest fires a constructed reality of the event forms in your mind, however, if you look deeper into the origins of the most popular images used online, you’ll find they aren’t entirely accurate. Our perceived reality of the 2019 Amazon fires is formed by images on social media that are stripped of their context, don’t represent the current fires accurately, and are filtered by the perceived importance of others, leaving us with a warped interpretation of the event. 

Examining images posted under the #SavetheAmazon hashtag shows the massive disconnect between the reality constructed on social media and the true nature of the events going on in the Amazon. Videos surfaced on twitter of helicopters purposely starting fires with captions claiming them to be the Brazilian government purposely causing the 2019 Amazon fires. The footage used to back up these claims is real but the context of the situation was made up. In this case, the story is shifted from a wildfire prevention strategy used in British Colombia to one of corruption and destruction in the Amazon, warping peoples reality of the situation in Brazil. Another botched reality of the Amazon fires comes from social media posts containing images of animals suffering in the fires like elephants, tigers, koalas, and different species of monkeys. In reality, none of these animals are being affected by the Amazon fires because none of these species are native to South America. One specific image circulating social media shows a mother monkey mourning her dead baby claiming to be from the forest fires in Brazil but the real story is far less depressing. The photograph was taken in India after a baby monkey tripped and fell while playing, the photographer stated that moments after the photo was taken the baby monkey was back playing on his feet. An image can speak a thousand words, but when the context is shifted through a misleading caption the image can tell an entirely different story. The circulation of images sharing inaccurate representations of the 2019 Amazon fires warp peoples reality of the event. These images aren’t fake in the sense that they are edited, they are fake in the sense that their context is stripped away and replaced with a different one. Through images like these, events are constructed by individuals, not the actual event itself, creating a warped interpretation of the Amazon forest fires. 

Many images circulating on social media that claim to be of the 2019 Amazon fires are somewhat accurate in the sense that they are actual photos of forest fires in Brazil, however, these images aren’t entirely accurate either. Several of the most popular images used to depict the fires are actually from different years and different locations. In the [New York Times article “As Amazon Fires Spread, So Do the Misleading Photos”
](https://www.nytimes.com/2019/08/23/world/americas/amazon-rainforest-fire-photos.html "As Amazon Fires Spread, So Do the Misleading Photos") celebrities and politicians are shown to have shared fake photos of the 2019 Amazon fires like [Cristiano Ronaldo](https://twitter.com/Cristiano/status/1164588606436106240), [Leonardo DiCaprio](https://www.instagram.com/p/B1b_JNIF1kg/), [The President of Chile](https://twitter.com/sebastianpinera/status/1164667522404274178), and other influential people (Chokshi, 2019). When looking at the origins of the three most popular photos shared by these celebrities, you’ll find that all three are not of the current Amazon fires (Chokshi, 2019). Although two of the photos are of fires in the Amazon, one was taken 30 years ago in 1989 and the photographer of the other photo died in 2003 making the photo at least 16 years old. The third most popular image is of a forest fire that didn’t occur in the Amazon, but rather took place on the opposite side of Brazil in 2013. One thing that these three photos have in common is that they are images of severe fires engulfing old-growth forests, old forests that take hundreds of years to form. Almost all of the most popular images claiming to depict the 2019 Amazon fires show the burning of these remote old-growth forests, when in reality, a large majority of the fires are taking place on inhabited Amazonian farmland and the surrounding forest (Symonds, 2019). Although these images do a good job showing the damage these fires can do, it doesn’t represent the majority of the fires happening in less important areas of the forest. These shocking images become so popular because they show the most damage being done by the Amazon fires, but conveniently, no real photos of the 2019 fires made the cut. 

Since a lot of the images of the Amazon fires aren’t accurate or truthful, it is hard to envision what the true extent of the damage done in Brazil this year looks like. My research into the true nature of the 2019 fires quickly invalidated the reality I had constructed using these misleading photos. This made me question whether the photos I had viewed constructed a story worse than the reality of the situation and whether my constructed reality of the fires would ever be completely accurate? Since the majority of people are unable to see all the damage in person, our view is limited to images deemed important enough to share by other people. These images are further filtered by popularity and perceived importance on social media, leaving us with a finely filtered selection of images that we use to create our own reality of the situation. In the case of the 2019 Amazon fires, this process created a warped representation of the event on social media. 

“By furnishing this already crowded world with a duplicate one of images, 	photography makes us feel that the world is more available than it really is” 
– Susan Sontag, In Plato’s Cave (2008)

Our perceived reality of the 2019 Amazon forest fires is produced by images which have been stripped of their context, images that don’t represent the current fires accurately, and images filtered on social media by popularity and perceived importance. This leaves us with a finely filtered selection of images, many of which don’t depict the Amazon fires at all. While some of the fake images shared of the Amazon fires are easy to debunk on first glance, many aren’t and therefore pass the task of fact checking down to the viewer. Deciphering world issues has become a massive challenge in the age of social media therefore being critical in your analysis has become a necessity in order to accurately navigate content shared online. 


## Resources

Área Queimada - Programa Queimadas. (2019). Retrieved from 	http://queimadas.dgi.inpe.br/queimadas/portal-static/situacao-atual/.

Chokshi, N. (2019, August 23). As Amazon Fires Spread, So Do the Misleading Photos. 	Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2019/08/23/world/americas/amazon-rainforest-	fire-photos.html.

National Geographic. (2019, September 12). 10 amazing Amazon facts! Retrieved from 	https://www.natgeokids.com/uk/discover/geography/physical-geography/amazon-facts/.

Sontag, Susan. On Photography. Penguin Books, 2008.

Symonds, A. (2019, August 23). Amazon Rainforest Fires: Here's What's Really Happening. 	Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2019/08/23/world/americas/amazon-fire-brazil-	bolsonaro.html?action=click&module=RelatedLinks&pgtype=Article.
