---
title: The Power of a Photo and Influence of the Digital Self
lname: Bergie
fname: Morgan
email: bergiem@mcmaster.ca
web: N/A
image-description: A mobile phone taking a photo of a women's face 
bio: Morgan Bergie is a full-time student attending McMaster University, aspiring to complete an undergraduate degree in Honours Communications Studies. She currently lives in Ancaster, Ontario, Canada and one day hopes to pursue a career in a media-based field. 
---
A photograph has become a staple, a modern art form that has been found commonplace in the digital space. But it is quite difficult to narrow the true purpose of a photo due to the presence of exponentially changing technology and social media. Many who now utilize the medium on a daily basis have solely turned to photos for self-presentation and preserving their digital appearance. Jason Parham, in his article “Depth of Field: When Photographs Turn the Real into the Surreal” (2019), seems to believe that a photo’s objective is produced extensively from their presentation of the real world, and the perspective of the viewer. I agree with his notions, however, the photo as a medium presently is more complex than such observations. 

Social media, especially the Instagram platform, have given individuals the opportunity to create unique digital identities strictly utilizing photos. Such presentations of the self are, in most cases, altered and personalized as the user sees fit. In his piece, Parham, while analyzing a photo taken by Mladen Antonov, describes how the image can provoke how the viewer perceives reality. He writes, “...I find myself drawn to the photo because...it asks me to suspend reality and step into the surreal...it asks us to imagine more” (2019). The “surreal” Parham mentions is what I believe Instagram (and others) create through the use of the digital profile. Users are subconsciously building their idealized identity, their “perfect” selves. Outsiders viewing these online personas are shifted from seeing the real to an almost fabricated utopia. Platforms that place priority on the photo has ultimately given preeminent significance to social image. Jose Van Dijck (2008) gives comment to this contemporary media trait. She states, “...individuals articulate their identity as social beings not only by taking and storing photographs to document their lives, but by participating in communal photographic exchanges that mark their identity as interactive producers and consumers of culture” (p. 63). Photos, therefore, are a manipulation of our self-presentation, whether it be intentional or accidental. Overall, photographs have intertwined with us, possibly becoming the foundation of a modern identity itself.  

Recently, it seems that all photos I encounter are edited or modified in some way. In my opinion, an original photo and the altered product are viewed and interpreted differently.  The technologies of doctoring, filtering and photoshop disrupt what is initially being captured. Editing an image, at its core, comes from the overwhelming social need to be without flaws, errors or blemishes. Instagram, most notably, has an environment that reinforces stereotypes of beauty and social influence. We, as users, possibly feel forced to reconsider every photo we take to maintain our digital reputation. Once again, the meaning of a photo taken is redirected towards the social appearance. Parham reminds readers that a photo like Antonov’s, free from excess technological influence, makes the viewer feel as though they are experiencing what is in front of them. He writes, “[The photo’s] sci-fi flourishes...are the result of Antonov’s clever shooting...the narratives are, in fact, part of the same story...Like the best art, it demands vulnerability” (2019). Much of the photos I encounter daily do not have the vulnerable mindset that Parham identifies. Due to the nature of social media, I, as a viewer, feel forced to take a photo only from what appears on the surface. My ability to interpret an image in its entirety is disrupted by the surplus of alterations one can make. Van Dijck (2008) calls this subject into question when she writes, “From the culturally accepted modifiability of public images, it is only a small step to accepting your personal pictures as mere ‘stock’ in the ongoing remodeling of life’s pictorial heritage” (p. 66-67). Editing resources have detached the quality from the medium as a whole. I am constantly questioning if a photo I am seeing is real or true and how _much_ of the image is real. Nevertheless, these technologies should not be discredited, but the normalization of photo doctoring may be detrimental to photography as a tool for self-expression.  

Another variable that often disrupts defining the purpose of photography is generalizing images into categories of art forms versus a device for communication. The latter has become the more popularized use for a photo, but many images often embody both classifications. Parham provides an excellent example beginning with his description of Antonov’s photo. He writes, “...the image presents itself as a photomontage—as two separate photographs overlaid into one weirder formulation. There is a couple riding past one of the many fisherman ports. There are the two-dopey eyed fish, hovering in the image’s foreground...married here by Antonov’s skillful angling” (2019). The art of the photo is shown through the capture of the fish and the people, providing a visual oddity. The communication aspect comes from the analysis that Parham himself gives. He expresses how the image makes him feel, and even describes how his encounter with the photo was similar to a substance-induced high he experienced (2019). Overall, placing boundaries on an image restricts the medium altogether. 

Photography at this point is facing a significant transition. On the Internet, specifically through social media, we are bombarded with millions of published photos daily. Photos as a medium has unfortunately been abated by the social norms. Images now have standardized structures that did not exist prior to social media and the Internet itself. Editing software and other technologies have called into question the validity of images, and thus, made photos an almost untrustworthy tool regarding communication. As I read the article by Jason Parham, I felt as though he was calling the current state of photos within the media into question. Images should always remain thought-provoking, even if it is a simple profile picture or Instagram upload. However, they should not produce feelings of unsureness and falsity. I began my discussion by offering the question of what the purpose of photography truly is. At this point, I do not have a stable or clear answer. With how much the medium changes due to technological and social influences, it is hard to ever really know a photo’s true intentions. Nevertheless, photography will continue to be a predominant aspect of the media landscape no matter how difficult our relationship with it may be. 

## References 
Parham, J. (2019, October 3). Depth of field: when photographs turn the real into the surreal. _WIRED_. Retrieved from  https://www.wired.com/story/depth-of-field-surreal-real/. 

Van Dijck, J. (2008). Digital photography: communication, identity, memory. _Visual Communication_, _7_(1), 57-76. 