---
title: Technology x Biology = The Future of Sport
lname: Bishop
fname: Jacob
email: bishoj1@mcmaster.ca
image-description: Technological Advancement
bio: Jacob Bishop is an undergraduate student at the University of McMaster, located in Hamilton, Ontario, Canada. He studies communications and labour studies and is on his way to graduating with an honours double major. Jacob has many goals and aspirations in life related to the academic studies he surrounds himself with. A dream he has is to educate those around him with insightful information learned throughout his lifetime. 
--- 

Technology is reality. It is the future of everyday interactions. When biology gets mixed into the equation the unimaginable happens. We immagine. Athletes and scientists are on the cusp of a new discovery that will revolutionize the sporting industry. Biotech will provide endless opportunities for individuals who thought the impossible. 
## Everyday life
 The chosen article, “The Brave New World of Sports”, is written in response to performance enhancing technology and drugs within the sporting industry. Historically, doping and performance enhancing technologies have been frowned upon in any and all sport cultures, which brings us to the question of why? In every other culture and industry we encourage technological advancements that support our well being and interests. In the auto industry, technological advancements come forward everyday and constantly improve and alter our everyday vehicles to make them better and more tailored to the individual. Why do we not seek the same advancements for professional sports and athletes? With any given technological advancement to the human body there is a great potential to shatter records and redefine the sport entirely. 

Drugs that improve human performance are already widespread throughout the world and prescribed daily. Adderall is an example of a performance enhancing drug that scholars and students use, steroids are used throughout the majority of professional sports leagues, and other hormone related substances are frequently used by athletes to improve their abilities. 

## Culture
Sport culture is heavily linked to ethical codes and conduct which does find itself at the forefront of discussions surrounding human sport advancements, but only because it is rarely discussed and evaluated in a positive way. If we were to look through a different lens at the idea of performance enhancing technologies and drugs, we would realize that an entirely new industry awaits discovery. The potential that lies on these technologies and drugs are unprecedented as we have no way of truly testing or analyzing the effects. With the proper education and guidance, this new sport industry could emerge and take the world by storm. If there is an advancement developed that can improve a divers ability to hold his or her breath underwater for longer, why are we not at least testing or developing products? What if we can make olympians jump higher or farther? The question is not about changing an industry but about adapting to new technologies that allow for an industry of advanced human performers to grow. 

If a new sporting industry were to emerge, it would only be for the better due to the facts that it would appeal to new sponsors, new support, and new opportunities. What this really means is more money. Everyone knows that anything and everything is about money in today’s day and age which supports the idea of a new industry, especially one of sports. This specific industry would be tailored to those who encourage and advocate for human advancements within biology and biotechnology. It would be an entirely new population of individuals and supporters that would advocate for this type of industry to flourish within mainstream society. Yes, it would compete against pre established leagues and sports, but only because interest levels would be inflated due to the negative perceptions and connotations linked to the industry. People like new and improved stuff. The idea of this new industry provides those who are handicapped or disabled a chance to do the things they love or once loved. When new opportunities are provided to those who don’t usually get them, it sparks a flame inside your stomach that drives you to support and innovate technologies that could have any potential to help and or advance their pre existing abilities. 

Digital cultures are what students and many professionals participate in each and everyday. We are constantly contributing to societies demanding need of innovation and improvements to everyday actions. This article written by Zoltan Istvan supports the idea of digital cultures in that technological uses on human biology is for the better, not worse. Consider plastic surgery as an example of how technology is used on humans to alter their perceived appearance. Individuals have the tools to refigure each and every part of the body to create the desired physical appearance. The same goes with photoshop in how we are easily able to manipulate and alter images to appear as we want. These examples are similar to biotechnology in how they are simply used to advance personal and professional settings throughout a variety of professions.

## New Reality
This could be a new reality that is soon to be shared with the world and one that is soon to be practiced and exercised by those all around us. “What if some sports were based on human athleticism more akin to Formula One racing where scientists, engineers and innovation play a significant role in who makes it to the winner’s podium?” This proves a good point that there already exists a sport where technology manages the majority of performance within an industry and plays a key role. If there is an opportunity that allows an individual to enhance their abilities, who should have the right to tell them otherwise. Regulations would need to be established but that is all part of adapting and expanding into new cultures and societies. 

The people who would benefit from a technological performance enhanced sport industry would be everyone. Between scientists, athletes, engineers, innovators, entrepreneurs, and average joe’s, there will be something that attracts attention and then something to consume, whether it be entertainment or physical consumption of a product. Nothing says you'll support the idea of biotechnology, but nothing says  you wouldn't spectate a performance if it were televised? Or if your country was in a gold metal match? At the end of the day the brave new world of sports is never going to stop innovating and it will never stop growing. Advancements and enhancers are going to become a norm found throughout many professional disciplines as their goal is to make people better, faster, stronger. 

If you were to take one thing away from this piece of writing it should be that performance enhancing technology and drugs have the potential to exceed imagination and provide endless opportunities for scientists and athletes. Individuals who suffer from disabilities holding them back from finding and achieving their full potential could now have the opportunity to fulfil those dreams.

## Resources

Istvan, Z. (2019, September 13). The Brave New World of Sports. Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2019/09/13/opinion/sports-doping.html?searchResultPosition=11. 
