---
title: The Ethics of New Technology Research
lname: Burton
fname: Eric
email: burtone@mcmaster.ca
image-description: An image of a phone with the phone camera pointing towards a child that is blowing bubbles
bio: Eric Burton is a Multimedia & Communications student at McMaster University
---

The internet has grown into an incredibly important platform for artists, content creators, and general internet users. However, the internet has also grown into an ideal platform for researchers. In Sidney Fussell’s _The Atlantic_ article, _YouTube Videos Are a Gold Mine for Health Researchers_, she speaks with researcher Bappaditya Mandal on how he and his colleagues at England’s Keele University use artificial intelligence to study the movements and behaviour of children with autism through YouTube videos (Fussell, 2019). Mandal discusses how they use YouTube as a tool for research purposes rather than using traditional research methods that typically involve lab equipment or invasive testicle sensors (2019). Essentially, Fussell’s article focuses on YouTube as a rich online source for researchers who are studying the behaviour of children with autism. Some of the highlights and main ideas that are within this article are that of privacy, surveillance, ethics of ‘digital exhaust’ (which all go hand-in-hand); preventative measures; and the advancing of technology/technology as a tool. Additionally, upon reading this article, I had found various issues with the ideas presented regarding how researchers are utilizing YouTube as a source for viable research. These issues relate to the idea of the digital self and the quantified self and the self-presentation in the media, as well as the overall ethics of this type of research. 
	
To begin, a significant portion of this article revolves around ‘digital exhaust’. Bioethicist Matthew Beitz (2019) describes digital exhaust as the information/data that digital users produce just by using digital technologies. An example of ‘digital exhaust’ is cookies from websites or apps. Issues that relate to the idea of the digital exhaust are that of privacy and surveillance. Privacy and surveillance issues have continually grown alongside technological developments like the internet, and specifically, YouTube. However, privacy and surveillance issues in the case of watching YouTube videos for research purposes are just natural as to what a YouTube video is - a video on the internet that anyone with access can watch. In this article, the researchers target YouTube specifically, and I believe it is primarily because of two reasons: the video medium and the fact that most videos on YouTube are not privatized - meaning YouTube videos are far more accessible than videos on Instagram or Twitter, for example. Although YouTube does possess the ability for users to make their videos private, it does not seem nearly as common as the privatizing of Instagram or Twitter accounts. 
	
In Fussell’s article, she delves into the ethics of digital phenotyping, a growing field of study which she defines as “using passive social-media or smartphone data to infer someone’s health status or to study health dynamics” (2019). Essentially, digital phenotyping is closely related to the ideas of the digital and quantified self because of the quantifying of passive user data. Judging by the perspective in Fussell’s article, the intentions of the digital phenotyping researchers are ethical. However, just because the researcher’s intentions are good, does that deem digital phenotyping as an ethical process? In a perfectly ethical world, researchers would have the opportunity to individually ask particular users for permission to study their video content on YouTube. But, as Beitz notes in Fussell’s article, this process is virtually impossible (2019). It appears that researchers, despite not always being able to ask users for permission, deem this act as an ethical process in research studies. 

I believe that this research can be considered ethical only if there is a clear progression and success in preventative measures to the particular conditions notated in Fussell’s article. The researchers in this article aim to detect a wide array of specific conditions such as depression, Parkinson's, and schizophrenia, along with autism (2019). In addition, researcher Dennis Wall pinpoints the potential problems of autism if intervention or treatment is not pursued during the early stages, stating that if this is the case, the long-term prognosis becomes worse (2019). Essentially, using algorithms within apps and related programs can potentially shorten the diagnosis process significantly - which I believe is a major plus in using this research method in terms of its ethics. Despite the aforementioned points that depict digital phenotyping as an ethical form of research, there are many counterpoints to using this research, which directly relate to the digital and quantified self, as well as self-presentation in the media. 
	
There are flaws that encompass digital phenotyping as a method of research. In Alice Marwick and Danah Boyd’s article _I Tweet Honestly, I Tweet Passionately: Twitter Users, Context Collapse, and the Imagined Audience_, they discuss new media and the themes and ideas that revolve around audiences of new media. Some of the key themes are that of self-presentation, identity, and the ‘imagined audience’ in social media. Many newer platforms of media such as Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn, and even YouTube contain users that will put on a persona or represent themselves differently online versus in-person through the idea of the imagined audience (Marwick; Boyd 2010, p.2). Specifically, in YouTube’s case, users are documented/documenting using cameras and visuals. I compare this to the idea of surveillance. For example, someone acting differently in a retail store because they notice a camera is watching them. And in Marwick and Boyd’s article (2010), Twitter users specifically censor their content based on the idea that users assume anyone can publically view their tweet (p.12). It becomes similar, then, regarding YouTube and how similar the situations are, especially since YouTube as a social platform is far less private than that of Twitter. Users seem to consider the imagined audience prior to posting public content. In Fussell’s article, it seems as though the research is being targeted towards family videos, where parents point the camera towards their (or someone else’s) children as they act ‘naturally’. Of course, having the children act naturally is the goal for researchers, but this may not always be the case, thus, creating potential flaws in the validity and authenticity of digital phenotype research. Essentially, researchers can never be 100% sure of the authenticity in the acting or movements of children due to the ideas of self-presentation and the imagined audience. 
	
Conclusively, YouTube has certainly given researchers a new method for researching symptoms for conditions such as autism, but there are many flaws that encompass this type of research. Primarily, these flaws revolve around ethical issues, with themes of privacy/surveillance and the digital and quantified self; and the self-presentation and the idea of the imagined audience tainting authentic research. There is still a gray area when it comes to the ethics of digital phenotyping and digital exhaust, however, technology and social media are continually developing. And in terms of the future for media-based research, hopefully, more ethical methods of research emerge regarding social media and digital exhaust. 

## Bibliography
Fussell, S. (2019, September 10). YouTube Videos Are a Gold Mine for Health Researchers. 
Retrieved from https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2019/09/breakthrough-autism-research-uses-social-media-videos/597646/.

Marwick, A. E., & Boyd, D. (2010). I tweet honestly, I tweet passionately: Twitter users, context
collapse, and the imagined audience. New Media & Society, 13(1), 114–133. Doi:
10.1177/1461444810365313

New Life Hacks. (2017, March 3). 5 Smartphone Hacks that Help You Take Better Pictures.
Retrieved from http://newlifehacks.com/2016/12/12/smartphone-hacks-better-pictures/.