---
title: Facebook and Dating apps? It’s Not a Match 
lname: Cameron
fname: Brynn
email: camerb9@mcmaster.ca
web: 
image-description: Facebook Icon on iPhone 
bio: Brynn Cameron is a third year communications and multimedia studies student, passionate about design and production. This summer Brynn had her first experience working in Advertising as an intern at Anomaly Toronto. She is excited to continue her studies and hopefully end up back in the field of advertisement some day!
---

An article in The Guardian, ‘Facebook announces dating app focused on 'meaningful relationships', reviews how Facebook’s recently launched dating feature attempts to offer enhanced continued value, but users are on the fence about it. Facebook’s goal is to match users with a familiar crush or a new friend, offering specific features such as auto filling your dating profile based on your data that’s already been collected. This is a unique feature and can only be offered by a platform that has already collected mountains of personal data. What is making people hesitant about this new service is that Facebook’s track record in protecting personal data has been shaky. The new feature also comes at an unfortunate time, as only a week prior to its launch, Facebook faced yet another data-leaking scandal when a glitch released millions of users’ private information.  Rightly, people are skeptical of Facebook’s ability to keep delicate information private, such as sexual preference and online conversations. Beyond that, there is also the question of legitimacy and the ability to use prepopulated social media to accurately match people when one’s ‘social self’ may not necessarily reflect reality.  I have to wonder if Facebook’s new feature is setting the stage for ‘Dating Disaster’ rather than ‘meaningful relationships’. 
 
Privacy is an issue Facebook has been struggling with in the last few years. Under the guise of ‘sharing’, people have put their lives forward (either real or adjusted versions of themselves), without fully realizing the implications of all that a company can do with that information. With this latest feature, new sensitive questions being asked will potentially leave people even more vulnerable. In order to participate in the new feature, Facebook will be asking mandatory questions about sexual preference and require access to location, to facilitate matching people with others nearby. The article raises questions as to why users would enable this feature and allow Facebook to obtain more personal detail, especially when Facebook also has the ability to pull in Instagram data to create Facebook dating profiles. Divulging information about yourself through the Facebook dating feature may also be risky as Facebook collects and stores all data shared through the service, even conversations you have with your potential soulmate. The article addresses these privacy issues and even mentioned that Bumble, another popular dating app, has reached out in hopes of collaboration and to help Facebook dating get off the ground successfully without any privacy issues. Since a competitor wants to give Facebook advice, it seems the word is out that Facebook could permanently damage people’s trust in online dating apps! It wouldn’t be a bad idea for Facebook to take some pointers from an already successful app that has no history of multiple privacy breaches.
 
The reality of social media is that the audience defines every post. Depending on the platform, and the audience a person is posting for, each post can receive varying bias. Preserving one’s social image will always be a factor when using any social media. From platform to platform the audiences and intentions can change. So, here’s the problem - Facebook dating is betting on the idea that user's posts reflect their authentic self so they can match with another authentic person with similar interests. If social image changes depending on what platform and audience the posts are for, how accurate are these Facebook matches going to be? If Facebook and Instagram are combining forces to do a full data run-down on users to find out details that could connect you to another person, there is potentially a large gap in that data. For example, one might keep a Facebook profile to connect with grandparents and family, while their Instagram profile may be tailored toward a completely different social image than what Grandma is allowed to see! These gaps in data collected will be problematic, as Alice Marwick points out, in how people judge a post, stating, “Whether we are viewed as authentic depends on the definition imposed by the person doing the judging”. If it isn’t a person doing the judging but rather a computer or  an algorithm, this could impact the system in which Facebook uses to match people. Facebook is using algorithms such as pages you like, people you befriend, and even groups you’re a part of to match you with people that have similar interests. But they all may be swayed by the tailored digital self and the social image. There has been no definition provided on how specific pieces of data will be weighted to decide which pieces hold greater value in the algorithm, which could be an important element in success or failure. 
 
Through the article, there was an underlying question being asked by the author, which is ‘why would people actually use this service?’ I could not help but think about the same thing. How is Facebook differentiating their dating features from other popular dating apps out there such as Tinder or Bumble and marketing it as a place to find “meaningful connections”? They are hoping the simplicity of having an account created for users and the ability to make a list of friends you’re hoping to match with but have maybe too scared to ask out will be the deciding factors in people switching over to Facebook dating. Facebook will create your profile out of the magnitude of data they have, attempting to make it as realistic and personal as possible. Mark Zuckerberg introduced Facebook dating as a place where people can “develop meaningful relationships” and not just have hookups, which can sometimes be the case with other dating apps like Tinder or Bumble. Facebook believes they offer greater opportunity for people to feel like they are establishing long-term relationships, even though sites such as Match.com markets themselves towards people who want to find those types of meaningful connections. Facebook is doing its best to mimic “real-life dating” by connecting people through locations and institutions, which could be a new technology-mediated way to create a better connection, but with an improper algorithm that perhaps fails to account for the social image or digital self, it could go over poorly.
 
After analyzing the Facebook dating feature, I personally question how it will algorithmically match people together correctly, as well as how many users are willing to trust Facebook with more sensitive information. Critically looking at the Facebook dating service, it is easy to see how this could be an unfortunate move for them if the algorithm sends people on too many disastrous dates. That 15-year-old profile from high school with the bad selfies, or the account that was just set up for University purposes which doesn’t reveal that someone may actually still be living in their parent’s basement at the age of 40 could lead to some poor assumptions in algorithm. There are already trust concerns with Facebook and putting people in unfortunate social situations based on their recommendations will not help to build Facebook’s brand!


## Resources 
Baker, M. (n.d.). Containing Multitudes. Retrieved from The Manual: https://alwaysreadthemanual.com/read/issues/5/mills-baker/article.html
Levin, S. (2018, May 1). Facebook announces dating app focused on 'meaningful relationships'. Retrieved from The Guardian : https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2018/may/01/facebook-dating-app-mark-zuckerberg-f8-conference
Marwick, A. E. (2010, July 7). I tweet honestly, I tweet passionately: Twitter users, context collapse, and the imagined audience. New York, New York, USA.





