---
title: Are Facetune and Photoshop Ruining Social Media? 
lname: Cipriano
fname: Ava
email: cipria1@mcmaster.ca
web: https://www.instagram.com/avaacip/
image-description: Girls photoshopping their image in a drastic way to fit into society.

bio: Ava Cipriano is a student and part-time receptionist at Oakville Chrysler currently living in Hamilton, Ontario, Canada. Ava is working towards a degree in Communications as well as a minor in English from McMaster University. She is also working towards becoming a teacher and hopes to be enrolled in University of Toronto teachers college come 2022. Ava has many passions including animals, fashion, media and,education.
---

In today's society, the ability to manipulate and alter photos has become extremely prevalent, resulting in the inability to decipher whether or not a photo of someone is illustrating their authentic looks. Apps such as Photoshop as well as Facetune have enabled the capability for people to modify their imperfections resulting in an inaccurate portrayal of their true identity. The New York Times provides an intriguing article analyzing the way celebrities not only physically alter their bodies but virtually as well. The article bashes the ability for people, specifically A- list celebrities, to completely change the way they look and encourage unhealthy standards regarding beauty and fashion in today’s society. Moreover, this article provides insight into the ability of digitalization to allow people the ability to portray themselves so differently through social media.

This article provides insight on the dangers of social media and how influential it can be in encouraging people to alter their looks. It sheds light on the way that celebrities portray themselves through social media constantly appearing perfect, as well as posting photos with extremely apparent edits on their bodies. Specifically, the article states, “Social media has all but provided me with a guide on exactly what procedures I would have to get to look more like Ariana Grande, how to Photoshop my waist to look like Kourtney Kardashian, the cheek filler I’d need to look like a swimsuit model” (Peyser, 2019). Moreover, the information presented emphasizes the lengths celebrities go to portray themselves perfectly through social media. Specifically, it suggests that celebrities are photoshopping their bodies to appear a certain way even though they do not look like this in person. This article also strives to provide insight on the realities of celebrities tampering with their appearance through the use of these apps by stating, “...it shows how everyone from A-list celebrities to lesser Instagram influencers Facetune and Photoshop their images..” (Peyser, 2019). This information reiterates what everyone watching these celebrities through social media are already thinking; that everything they post appears to be picture-perfect with no flaws apparent. 
	
Correspondingly, this coincides with the course material learned thus far. In particular, the notion of people portraying themselves so differently through images as well as through the media concurs with the ideas surrounding social image. Throughout the findings uncovered in the social image section, we have learned much about the misconstruction and misinterpretation of images posted online. One of the readings elaborates on the ability of photos to be altered by stating, “...personal photography has not changed as a result of digital technologies; the changing function of photography is part of a complex technological, social and cultural transformation. As the student’s anecdote illustrates, digitization is often considered the culprit of photography’s growing unreliability as a tool for remembrance…” (Dijck, 2008). Thus, this article demonstrates that the digitalization within society, as well as the increasing amount of tools designed to alter photos, has tainted the ability to produce authentic memories and depictions of people. The tools that are present in today’s world result in the inevitable unreliability of photography and the distortion within the media. This is emphasized in the New York Times article through the emphasis on the abilities of Photoshop and Facetune to so drastically alter these celebrities' bodies and faces. Additionally, the reading also raises questions regarding this ability to change photos so exponentially stating, “Digital photography raises several intriguing questions concerning manipulation and cognitive editing: what is the power of digital tools in sculpting identity? How do we gauge new features that help us brush up our pictures and make our memories picture-perfect? “ (Dijck, 2008). This underlines the fact that people are manipulating their photos into being the most perfect form of themselves ultimately altering their physical identity. 

Many students, such as myself, have undergone this social media trend firsthand through the constant utilization of Instagram. I have been able to not only watch celebrities edit and change their bodies but also most of my peers. Specifically, Facetune has provided the opportunity for most girls I follow on Instagram to completely alter and change the way their bodies look. I believe this is due to the increase in not only celebrities' photoshopping, but also general peers. When girls see their friends posting photos without any imperfections, they feel obligated to edit their photos as well and appear perfect as well. I even find myself utilizing the app to edit out things I am insecure about. These apps have caused social media to become a competition of who has the nicest body as well as who has the least imperfections. Additionally, the use of these apps results in the difficulty in deciding how someone looks in person versus through their social media apps. The culture created through these celebrities as well as people of interest posting these curated photos has also prompted an immense amount of young people to develop anxiety from comparing themselves to these perfect images. I believe this has caused many young girls to develop an array of mental health illnesses such as eating disorders, body dysmorphia, and general anxiety. An article online analyzes the relationship between social media use and depressive behaviours, illustrating the negative correlation between the two. Specifically, it also looks at the way developments in technology affect physiological and behavioural states of young adults stating, “Technology innovations will continue to affect the developmental period of adolescence into emerging adulthood in psychosocial and behavioural ways” (Merrill, 2019). Thus, this highlights the inevitable mental health issues that can arise through social media. Specifically, this depicts how these edited photos on Instagram can create these unfortunate issues for young adults.

Conclusively, the article presented by The New York Times was able to disclose the habitual occurrence in today’s society to constantly edit and change the appearance of photos. The article induced many other issues aligning with this topic demonstrating the toxicity of the usage of these apps. Specifically, it opened up the topic of the anxiety that is attributed to feeling the urge to alter photos so drastically. To enumerate, the article was able to conclusively depict the negativity in today’s society through social media as well as relate greatly to the ideas surrounding social image. 
	
## Resources

 
Peyser, E. (2019, April 18). The Instagram Face-Lift. Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/18/opinion/instagram-celebrity-plastic-surgery.html?searchResultPosition=7.

Merrill, R. A., & Liang, X. (2019). Associations between adolescent media use, mental health, and risky sexual behaviors. Children & Youth Services Review, 103, 1–9. https://doi-org.libaccess.lib.mcmaster.ca/10.1016/j.childyouth.2019.05.022

Van Dijck, J. (2008). Digital photography: communication, identity, memory. Visual Communication, 7(1), 57-76

