---
title: Social Media Authenticity
lname: Coffin
fname: Taylor
email: coffint@mcmaster.ca
web:
image-description: Fake duck and real duck 
bio: Taylor Coffin is a fifth-year student at McMaster University, living in Mississauga, Ontario, Canada. Taylor is working towards, and almost complete, a bachelor of arts degree in Honours Communications and a Diploma in Marketing. Taylor currently works on Canadian Tire's Employer Brand team, as part of the Human Resources Department part-time. After graduation, Taylor hopes to gain more experience in the workforce in branding and marketing and then go back to school to achieve her MBA. Some of Taylor's passions include branding, marketing, technology, entrepreneurship, and dogs.
---

During our course, the digital self and the social image are two aspects of creating an online persona that we have talked about extensively. It is clear that there are multiple ways an individual can portray their life on social media that make up an overall online identity. The world has shifted so much so online that the same way individuals embody a digital self and curate a social image, the same now goes for companies and brand promotion. As social media has become increasingly used as a platform for branding and marketing, I’m interested in taking the context of the digital self and the social image into the world of online promotion and how this plays a role in a successful marketing strategy. As stated in the article, _Social Media Marketing: All About Authenticity_, “These days, experts are throwing the word "authenticity" around as if it were the holy grail behind an enterprise's social media strategy” (Schrieberg, 2018). Using this article as a means for analysis, this editorial will discuss marketing and branding and what it means to curate an ‘authentic’ social image. 
 
The digital self and our social images, to me, go hand in hand. You can’t have one without the other. The digital self entails all aspects of who we are online, thought of as an extension of ourselves. On the other hand, our social image is more specifically how we curate our image online and accompanies the idea that we have a choice to manipulate how we present our digital selves. That being said, companies today, are able to use social media to curate a particular social image to market their products and bring their brand to life. Customers are much more likely to purchase a product from a brand they trust, and since social sites are the most organic and personable platforms currently on the market, companies use this to their advantage to connect and engage with existing and potential customers (Schrieberg, 2018). However, trust doesn’t just happen on its own because social media exists. The key to successfully building this bond between companies and customers is their ability to portray a social image that embodies authenticity. 
 
Since companies have started using social media for brand promotion, many users have been overexposed to picture-perfect ads, making this type of marketing too untrustworthy, unoriginal, and frankly no longer acceptable in today’s world (Schrieberg, 2018). As previously mentioned, social media is an organic platform, so I think a social image that is too curated is easily overlooked and automatically seen as inauthentic to the customer. Audiences tend to disconnect from brands who exude inauthentic content, which directly affects sales and profitably (Schrieberg, 2018). This explains why so many marketers have shifted their focus from posting traditional paid advertisements on their platforms to using influencers to do the marketing for them. By shifting the marketing focus away from the brand platform itself, brands have more ability to embody their ‘brand personality’ through more organic and engaging content, while the influencers do the heavy lifting. This concept relates to a brand’s digital self because we now have deeper emotions towards our love or hate for a brand because we have gotten to know them through their social channels. We are now able to perceive the abstract concept of a brand as having a physical entity other than just a logo – brands have now come to life through their personalities and interaction they exude on social media. This makes brands seem more real, more trustworthy, and of course, more authentic. As for advertisements and marketing, user-generated content is said to be the most successful because it is considered the most authentic and trusted form of marketing (Schrieberg, 2018). This allows customers to see products in action amongst influencers they trust, rather than just solely taking the brand’s word for it. Not only are brands shifting their marketing to just any influencer, but specifically using micro-influencers to their advantage (Schrieberg, 2018). Micro-influencers tend to support more niche interests and could be perceived as having less incentive from the brand to promote their products, resulting in a more honest review and recommendation (Schrieberg, 2018). 
 
As stated in _Social Media Marketing: All About Authenticity_, “The diversity of this type of organic inspiration and validation is considered highly credible. Moreover, user-generated content has proved to drive consumers into purchase. If this leads to a positive experience, they will likely post about it themselves, creating a posting-and-purchasing cycle” (Schriebegr, 2018). So as a whole, curating a social image that is personable and authentic on social media platforms creates just the right marketing mix to give customers the best impression of their brand persona to drive sales and ROI. However, the ironic part about building out an authentic social image strategy is just that - it’s a strategy. In my opinion, the purpose of authenticity is, to be honest, and transparent which will naturally build trust, and from a branding perspective, will naturally drive sales. It seems counterintuitive to have a perfect foolproof strategy to be authentic. So, my opinion as to what is truthfully authentic on social media still varies. 
 
As stated by Alice Marwick, “The fact that we constantly vary self-presentation based on audience reveals authenticity as a construct: are we more or less authentic with our book club or gym partner? Whether we are viewed as authentic depends on the definition imposed by the person doing the judging” (Price, 2019). In fairness, I think social media has given customers the most organic and transparent content that we have ever seen in a world where marketing exists. Nonetheless, there is always a certain level of manipulation online, and there is always a social image being portrayed. It’s interesting how social media has given consumers transparency into a brand that we wouldn’t have seen before, but at the same time, these brands are under scrutiny for manipulating their audiences to believe their definition of what transparency or authenticity looks like. The bottom line is that all aspects of social sharing sites allow us the ability to show a certain perspective, and hide another. What you believe to be authentic is subjective and what you promote to be authentic is strategically staged to look that way. 


**Resources**

Harry, J.S. Fake Duck and Real Duck. _Skylarity_. June 18, 2019. https://josiahharry.blog/2019 /06/18/the-	problem-with-authenticity/

Price, R. (2019). Digital Self. [Powerpoint Slides] Retrieved from https://avenue.cllmcmaster.ca/d2l/le/content/296580/viewContent/2456511/View

Price, R. (2019). Social Image. [Powerpoint Slides]. Retrieved from https://avenue.cllmcmaster.ca/d2l/le/content/296580/viewContent/2469561/View

Schrieberg, E. (2018, August 9). Social Media Marketing: All About ‘Authenticity’. _Toolbox_. Retrieved from https://marketing.toolbox.com/articles/social-media-marketing-all-about-authenticity
