---
title: Companies Can Tell Users Mental Health By Looking at Their Digital Self 
lname: Davies-Barlow
fname: Sierra 
email: daviesbs@mcmaster.ca
image-description: Human handing touching robotic hand 
bio: This paper talks about researchers studying certain strangers digital self will help to establish if they have a mental health problem. This paper is written by Sierra Davies-Barlow, a third year Communications student, studying at McMaster University.   
---

# Companies Can Tell Our Mental Health by Looking at Our Digital Self 

Tech companies believe that the way we portray our digital self online, can indicate  mental and physical health offline. Whether you are scrolling through your feed late at night, post content on social media daily, or message people in your contacts, these uses of technology can demonstrate someone’s personal well-being. In the article written by Natasha Singer of the New York Times, it is said that researchers and software companies are using these examples as ways to show symptoms of mental health and suicidal thoughts, in their users (2018). Due to the fact that technology is a large part in people’s everyday lives it can be a factor in revealing that someone has mental health issues. However, the research is so new that it can be unsafe for researchers to base their knowledge of someone’s mental health off of their digital self. At this time, it would be better for the researchers to know and understand the person being researched in real life, as well as online, in order to determine their mental state. In addition, to identify someone’s mental health issues by only using their digital self is wrong. 
Digital self is the idea that someone’s persona changes when they are online, compared to their offline self (Hicks, 2010). It is very typical that when using online mediums people change who they are, from who they are in real life. Users on social media are able to display a completely different aspect of their lives, making it seem like they do not have mental health problems, when in real life they are suffering from anxiety, depression, etc. Many social media users essentially post only the positive moments in their lives, and tend to leave out the bad because they do not want people to see their lows in life, only their highs. In addition, When going through certain social networks users can see thousands of people vent about their mental health issues online. Some people feel comfortable talking about their mental health problems, while others do not. Therefore, just because someone does not choose to talk about their mental health online, does not mean to say that they are not suffering from it. 
On the other hand, people who use social media often post a lot about their lives, giving people a lot of insight on their personal life. If researchers were to look at certain peoples social media accounts they might successfully be able to understand their individual mental state. Therefore, it could be possible to diagnose an individual with mental health problems, by just understanding their digital self. As a result, it may seem as if you know a person, based off of their instagram or twitter accounts, when in reality they are completely different. The article suggests ideas about scanning for suicidal thoughts in their users conversation. For example, if a friend were to comment “Are you okay?” or “can I help?” , it may assign a certain algorithm to the post and alert facebook review team (Singer, 2018). In which case the apps will send users a supportive notice suggesting a helpline for them to contact. Though in theory the algorithm seems like a good idea, with the intention to help those that are in need of help with their mental health, there are many phrases that can be picked up by the algorithm that are very broad and are not a clear indication as to if the person is actually struggling with suicide. This could be very invading on people’s personal lives. The article also looked at “detecting depression in clicks”, for example, if an extremely sociable user suddenly stops using social platforms, this could be an indication that he/ she has become depressed (Singer, 2018). This research looks at the different users phone habits, seeing changes in taps and clicks will give hints about mood and memory adjustments that can be associated with depression(). However, a lot of people that suffer from mental health handle their fluctuation of mental health differently. Just because one person stopped using social media platforms or texting people in their contacts, for a certain amount of time, doesn’t mean to say that the next person will do the same. Therefore, to base a diagnosis off of someones digital self is not a true representation of who they are. It is always that possibility that in some cases the person being studied is only showing the positive aspects of their lives, leaving out the bad.
As a result, it would be very hard for researchers to reveal that someone has mental health problems based off of their digital self. This is because researchers would only be seeing one perspective of the person’s life. Though social media is a large part in many people’s lives, there are still a lot of aspects of their lives that they decide to keep offline. It is also very invading to have companies research their users digital selves and then diagnose them with a mental health issue. The best way to make sure that their users are being safe on their platform, is to encourage all users on their social media platform to seek therapy if they are struggling with their mental health. This way they will not be targeting one single user, btu ensuring that everyone on the app is aware of the help that they can receive for their mental health. In addition, all people are different when it comes to their mental health. If social media platforms were to have one standard way of knowing who has mental health issues on their platform it would be very difficult. If a certain platform wanted to understand their users mental health, it is best that they recognize both the person’s digital self and who they are offline. Furthermore, social media is known to have negative effects on people’s mental health, therefore it is possible that users who use social media more often are more prone to mental health problems. For media companies to scour their users personal information on social media, is not an efficient way to conclude that some of their users may have mental health problems based on their profiles online. 



