---
title: Sleep is the Data They Want
lname: David
fname: Ken
email: davidk1\@mcmaster.ca
image-description: a screengrab from the Pokémon Company's live-stream of the press release
bio: a dude who likes multimedia 
---
Out of the possible attributes in our daily lives that can be – and
is very much so – in the online world for the public to already see,
corporations now want the attributes of our sleep. Recently this year, the
Pokémon Company had a press release about their upcoming projects, one of which
was about a game that takes place inside our bedrooms. *Pokémon Sleep* is
supposed to turn our sleep schedules, conditions, habits, and other sleep
related attributes into a form of entertainment. What intrigues me is that there
is an obvious ulterior motive to the purpose of this app’s creation. Other than
Pokémon developers at the company who genuinely like making Pokémon games, some
of these developers felt that they could make a sleeping app where it can
collect the data of many user’s sleeping information. Of course, they strive to
make us believe that this data, which the app will collect, can help further
better our personal sleeping habits. However, like *Nicole Carpenter* points out
in the article, the information from our sleep has a lot of marketing potential
because it’s not something corporations can openly be provided with. An
interviewee within the article states how the development of video games
captures parts of our lives – like how long we can stay up to complete a game in
one sitting before giving up. But during that development in the past, our sleep
was one of the untouched pieces of information within the parts of our lives.
But through further development, games can have the capabilities of retrieving
said data and making them monetizable. The bigger picture of this whole idea is
that, rather than knowing personal data collection is going to be used for
corporations, games – in this case, the Pokémon Company‘s game – mask this
monetizable data collection as entertainment. This idea and its details feel
unsettling to me because of how our digital self-data is taking form as our
sleep information.

            To start off, one of the reasons why this whole idea of *Pokémon
Sleep* feels odd is that a part of our lives – that is not normally measured –
can now be a part of the digital persona that corporations have on us.
Corporations can either have tailored-specific data of an individual under their
market or sub-categorical data to types of groups under their market. Using this
potential data from a Pokémon app would be realistically difficult to become
individual data for corporations – although, it is not completely impossible to
do the task. However, the multitude of data collected from people, potentially
using this app, can be collected as mere points within the masses for market
analysis. The data made by many users could collectively be plotted onto a chart
to help corporations understand the usual patterns of how the app users sleep
and tailor many things based on that newly found information. These possible
tailored things can be marketing of certain services or products that are
provided by the company’s app itself. In other words, both advertising the app
to Pokémon fans and the purchasable device for the app; a potential infinite
cycle if you will. Also, another potential idea that Pokémon could do under
closed windows is share the sleep data to other companies to help them market
their products or services to the same group of people. This possible chain of
events is realistic and frightening for many reasons, but one of the reasons
that gives me concern is the idea of how all this can shape ourselves rather
than us shaping ourselves in the online world. Apps owned by companies, other
than Pokémon of course, already have the capabilities of tailoring their
consumer’s user experience to who they are; they use their data created by the
users using their app to relay specific potential products before users would
even think about it. However, this capability of apps begs the question of
whether it is the users shaping their digital selves or the artificial
intelligences shaping the digital user – and ultimately, the user in the real
world. With this idea in mind, this article was published. However, the article
was updated with the Pokémon Company’s comment on the situation. They got a
spokesperson to state how they will treat privacy seriously, comply with all
government laws when designing a game, and apparently have a list on their
website about how they currently deal with their data. Of course, they already
have data of Pokémon fans like play time from their main games and travel
related information from Pokémon GO, but sleep is a whole new market that’s
unfamiliar to many in this current time. But as you look on their site
containing the spokesperson mentioned list, they state in one area how they
implement many things to protect our personal information from unauthorized
access and improper use. But on another line further below, they say inactive
accounts are no longer maintained on their servers, so personal data can be
either wiped or treated poorly in privacy compared to active accounts. So, the
idea of Pokémon collecting data on our sleep and realizing the current age of
technology, seeing how this plan from the Pokémon Company play out intrigues my
interest in an unsettling way.

            With all that in mind, the idea of Pokémon collecting our sleep data
and realizing technology’s capabilities can give off an unsettling feeling if a
person realizes this. However, this potential capability of tracking our sleep
can be dangerous in the wrong hands. This has become concerning to the point
where someone – in this case *Nicole Carpenter* – realized the app’s potential
and interviewed a game designer, wrote an article, and got word about its
potential problem from an official spokesperson from the Pokémon Company through
an email. Now don’t get me wrong, I’m an avid Pokémon fan and loyal to the
company’s works – mainly the games and not necessarily Pokémon GO. However, I
still have a slight interest in trying out this future app for myself to see
what that game designers create to fulfill my Pokémon needs. Nonetheless, my
piqued concern – similar to *Nicole Carpenter*’s word – will still be on my mind
as I plan to try it in the future, but it’s a topic that many should consider
before using the app or similar ones since our precious sleep is something
corporations want.

 

### Resources

Carpenter, N. (2019, May 29). 'Pokémon Sleep' Wants to Gamify Your Dreams.
Retrieved October 8, 2019, from
[https://www.vice.com/en_us/article/597w5a/pokemon-sleep-wants-to-gamify-your-dreams](https://www.vice.com/en_us/article/597w5a/pokemon-sleep-wants-to-gamify-your-dreams).

Privacy Notice. (n.d.). Retrieved October 8, 2019, from
[https://www.pokemon.com/uk/privacy-notice/\#17](https://www.pokemon.com/uk/privacy-notice/#17).

 

![](K:/acer 2/School/Digital Cul/david-ken-headshot.jpg)
