---
title: Social Media and Body Image
lname: de Jesus
fname: Adrian
email: 
web: 
image-description: Dumbbells on a dumbbell rack
bio: Adrian de Jesus is an artist and student at McMaster University. He is currently a double major in Multimedia and Theatre & Film at the university. 

---

The burst of social media’s popularity in the 2000s was a worldwide phenomenon. So much so that the effects of which are a popular area of study to this day. With popular social media platforms supplementing and in some cases replacing traditional aspects of socializing, it is only natural to question how its use affects how we present ourselves and how others perceive us. 

I feel fortunate that my elementary school system taught me and my classmates to really question the posts we see online. I was aware that pictures and word descriptions could be filtered to evoke an idealized life to online viewers. Before I started using social media, I was aware of the possible self-esteem issues it may cause. Up until recently I took pride that I was not being manipulated by the deceptive capabilities of social media. However, after reading Kelly Oakes _The complicated truth about social media and body image_ (2019), I now realise I have not been living outside of social media’s manipulative grasp, and also that society needs to come up with a healthier response to body image self-esteem issues.

The article begins by discussing how beauty manipulating practices such as selectively choosing skinny models and photo manipulation have trickled down from mainstream forms of media to social media (Oakes, 2019). The implied issue comes from society’s understanding that people presented on film, television, and posters are playing acts, whereas pictures posted on social media portray real lives. When people start manipulating photos to appear as ideal as possible, the line between created ideal representation and real life becomes blurred, and other people compare their own lives to a false ideal, leading them to think poorly of their own lives. This issue relates to the ideas of the digital identity and social image discussed in class. In situations like these, as Bischel, Camenisch, and Verdicchio state, the identity being portrayed represents only a small fraction of what the person's life is really like (Price, 2019). Additionally, the process of photo manipulation and manipulating the context of photos relates to social image and how one can present a photo in such a way to get a specific desired response from its viewers. It is not right for people to think poorly of their own lives, especially when they are comparing their actual lives to a constructed representation. 

The article then talks about the results of studies that look into the relationship between social media use and body image. The article states that there is a lack of studies in this area of research, but that the research that has been done shows a correlation between negative body self esteem issues and social media (Oakes, 2019). One study reveals that female university students feel negatively about their own body image when comparing themselves to celebrities and acquaintances on Facebook (Fardouly, 2015). Another study of female undergraduates looked into the habits of taking and posting a selfie photo on instagram (Mills, 2018). All of the participants ended up feeling less attractive by the end of the process, even if they were allowed to edit the photos (Mills, 2018). This relates to the course topic of storytelling on the web, and specifically relates to the reading “My selfie, myself”. Whereas the reading portrays selfies as a way of telling a more personal and interesting story (Wortham, 2015), this study views the act of taking a selfie as more of a self deprecating experience, where people pay too much attention to their flaws (Mills, 2018). As the article points out, there is a lack of research done in this area. I personally agree that there are body image issues arising because of social media. To fix this issue, however, I believe more research needs to be done to narrow down what aspects of social media are contributing most to these negative effects. 

Fortunately, the article looks into one study that somewhat narrows down the parts of social media leading to the undesirable effects. Another study consisting of female undergraduates split participants into groups that viewed instagram posts of either self-compassionate quotes, of the hashtag #fitspo (short for fitness inspiration), or both (Slater, 2017). The participants who viewed only the fitness inspiration posts felt worse about their self image, whereas the participants who viewed the self-compassionate quotes and the participants who viewed both types felt positive about their bodies (Slater, 2017). This 2017 study provides useful knowledge on how we can approach this self image issue. From my own experience, I have seen an increase of fitness posts with self-compassionate quotes within the captions, which I believe could be a response to the results of this study. 

The part of the article that I found most fascinating is where it talks about how social media affects men’s self image. The study that the article references concludes that “fitspiration content was associated with greater muscular-ideal internalisation and higher appearance comparison tendency, which in turn was...more appearance-based exercise motivation and less health-based exercise motivation” (Fatt, 2019). Throughout secondary and post-secondary, I have always been conscious of my own muscular appearance compared to my peers. In my first year of university, I also made it my goal to gain as much muscle size as possible regardless of its impact on my health. I ended up solely doing bodybuilding workouts with no cardiovascular work, and eating primarily meats and carbohydrates with little vegetables. Looking back at my first year self with the knowledge this article provides, it is now clear to me how the effects of social media can be so powerful as to affect one’s whole lifestyle, yet at the same time can remain unnoticed to the person being affected. Going through this self discovery, I now see the current structure of social media as a variation on Plato’s cave, where its users are prisoners to the structure and culture of social media platforms. We need to develop a better understanding of the systems we attach ourselves to if we ever want to see the light outside the cave.

In conclusion, _The complicated truth about social media and body image_ lists many of the ways social media platforms make us think negatively about our bodies. Studies have uncovered some of the ways it can make us think positively instead, but more research is required if we ever want to get over this societal issue. As for me, I have opened my eyes since first year and the only way I will ever look super jacked is if I am in my padded Power Rangers costume.

## Resources

Fardouly, J., & Vartanian, L. R. (2015). Negative comparisons about ones appearance mediate the relationship between Facebook usage and body image concerns. Body Image, 12, 82–88. doi: 10.1016/j.bodyim.2014.10.004

Fatt, S. J., Fardouly, J., & Rapee, R. M. (2019). #malefitspo: Links between viewing fitspiration posts, muscular-ideal internalisation, appearance comparisons, body satisfaction, and exercise motivation in men. New Media & Society, 21(6), 1311–1325. doi: 10.1177/1461444818821064

Mills, J. S., Musto, S., Williams, L., & Tiggemann, M. (2018). “Selfie” harm: Effects on mood and body image in young women. Body Image, 27, 86–92. doi: 10.1016/j.bodyim.2018.08.007

Oakes, K. (2019, March 12). Future - The complicated truth about social media and body image. Retrieved from http://www.bbc.com/future/story/20190311-how-social-media-affects-body-image.

Price, R. (n.d.).

Slater, A., Varsani, N., & Diedrichs, P. C. (2017). #fitspo or #loveyourself? The impact of fitspiration and self-compassion Instagram images on women’s body image, self-compassion, and mood. Body Image, 22, 87–96. doi: 10.1016/j.bodyim.2017.06.004

Wortham, J. (2013, October 19). My Selfie, Myself. Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2013/10/20/sunday-review/my-selfie-myself.html?pagewanted=all&module=Search&mabReward=relbias:s,{"2":"RI:16"}&_r=0.
