---
title: Online Gaming, Internet Trolls, and the Digital Self
lname: Denommee
fname: Aidan
email: denomma@mcmaster.ca
web:
image-description: Person typing on a keyboard. Photo by Soumil Kumar from Pexels
bio: Aidan Denommee is a third year Multimedia student at McMaster University, and enjoys playing online video games when he isn’t being yelled at by his teammates.
---

*Rocket League* is about as innocuous as a video game can be nowadays. In teams
of three, players drive rocket-powered cars around a soccer field in an attempt
to smack an enormous soccer ball into the opposing team’s net. It’s
surrealistic, goofy, and a blast to play with your pals, but it comes with a
caveat that plagues large numbers of online games. It is a caveat that can’t be
ignored, and the reason I would urge new players to avoid online play
altogether.

 

Considering the internet is largely text-based, it’s no surprise that acronyms
have emerged to communicate that users are laughing out loud, or shaking their
head in response to what they interact with online, but it was a surprise to me,
when one of my rocket-powered teammates used one I had never seen.

 

>   u should really kys

 

A google search after a lost match revealed that this player - again, my own
teammate - was telling me that I should kill myself. An egregious request, to
put it lightly, but unfortunately this kind of toxic behaviour is common in
online games. Spiteful players will do anything to elicit a negative reaction,
from purposely losing to the enemies, ensuring a loss for their own team, to
using downright hate speech. These actions don’t go unnoticed by game
developers. Ubisoft’s *Rainbow Six Siege *- a team-based shooter with a focus on
online play - implemented a chat filter to deter these kinds of hateful
messages. Additionally, many games offer the option to manually report players
that partake in unsportsmanlike conduct. Still, chat filters and reporting
systems are merely addressing the symptoms of the hostile atmosphere plaguing
online games, and worse yet, these behaviours extend beyond the gaming sphere,
and into the rest of the internet.

 

Actively trying to sour the online experience for others - an act known as
trolling - is prevalent across the web. Individuals seek to incite reactions out
of other online users in any way they can, from messaging death threats to
leaking victims’ personal information. While the internet is a wonderful
resource to unite like-minded individuals, this comes with the caveat of
providing a place for trolls to coordinate attacks on a larger scale. Hardy’s
*New York Times* article describes more notable cases, such as a hack causing
the Epilepsy Foundation’s website to flash seizure inducing images, or the
rigging of *Time Magazine’s* 2012 Person of the Year poll to boost North Korean
leader, Kim Jong-un to the number one spot. A single troll is at best, a minor
annoyance, and at worst, a danger to other users, but a band of trolls can wreak
havoc in the digital environments that more and more people are becoming a part
of. While trolling seems to be something that must be accepted online, the
pervasiveness of these actions begs the question, what enables this behaviour?

 

There are tools available for users to minimize the amount of trolling they
receive personally, such as functions to block or report users, but these tools
hardly protect a community from a coordinated trolling effort. Online social
engagements can lack the social norms that persist when communicating in-person,
and while algorithmically directed communities work to pair compatible users
with one another, this very system is what allows for these groups of trolls to
unite in their quest to make the web a worse place. This system is not an
inherently bad thing, and it is what allows for niche communities to thrive
where they otherwise wouldn’t. However, the systems in place also enable the
actions of trolls. In June of 2015, the popular social news media aggregate,
Reddit, had to ban a sub forum dedicated to making fun of and harassing
overweight individuals, and while the ban was met with generally positive
reactions, it is important to note that the website itself is what made the
coordination of these users possible.

 

The question of what should be changed in order to prevent trolling is a
difficult one. In his article *Containing Multitudes*, Baker poses that this
algorithmic approach to personalizing a user’s experience empowers them to
interact with the people they would like to. One could even say that this
freedom to browse the web on one’s own terms is the driving force behind the
internet, but there is no denying that this freedom comes with a cost. This
being said, one should not blame a stabbing on the knife, but rather on the
person who weaponized it, which leads me to believe that this prevalence of
toxic online behaviour is not a systemic issue, but an individual one.

 

One’s virtual self - or how they present themselves online - can differ from how
they present themselves in the material world. More often than not, people
create an ideal version of themselves when they tweet, comment, or share
pictures from their everyday lives. This is only natural considering we have
absolute control of what we post online, and thus get to create our own identity
in this virtual landscape. It would make sense then, that our social media
accounts - which often have our names attached to them - are a great opportunity
to represent who we are. But who says we need to represent ourselves at all? On
the web we can make fake names, pseudonyms, and aliases, relieving the pressure
of having our posts linked to our real-world selves. Certainly my grandmother
would never send me hateful messages over Facebook, but an anonymous or unknown
user could say anything they want to me, and face virtually no repercussions.
Hardy’s article describes trolls as seeing the internet as a location separate
from the real world. A place where they can get away with things they wouldn’t
be able to otherwise. This, I think, is where the issue of trolling stems. While
not everyone has the desire to be a nuisance to others, those that do see the
internet as their place to live that dream. This isn’t to say that these are
inherently bad people. Perhaps the online world is the only place where these
people hold any power, or perhaps they see it as the place they can be someone
other than themselves. This doesn’t excuse their behaviour, but I believe it
helps put it into perspective.

 

As it stands now, trolling is not going away. Even outside of the internet,
there are simply people that get a kick out of disrespecting social norms, and
while the structure of online platforms can enable these individuals to act in
horrible ways, it is this same structure that allows us to browse the web with
agency. For some, the internet is the only place where they are not required to
be themselves, and while it doesn’t excuse harassment, bullying, or hate speech,
it helps us understand why someone would act in such a way. Still, actions have
consequences; I don’t play Rocket League anymore. It becomes tiring to block
someone new every match, and I’d rather not be partaking in what’s supposed to
be a fun activity with such angry individuals. I consider myself lucky that,
from my perspective, a stranger’s request that I end my life doesn’t carry much
weight, but I fear for those for whom it does.

 

### Resources

Baker, M. Containing Multitudes. *The Manual, Issue 5.*

Hardy, Q. (2016). How Gaming Helped Launch the Attack of the Internet Trolls.
The New York Times.
