---
title: Analysis of How China Unleashed Twitter Trolls to Discredit Hong Kong’s Protesters
lname: Ding
fname: Xinyuan
email: dingx18@mcmaster.ca
web: www.instagram.com/heaartsbc/
image-description: this is the demonstration in process, the texts on the yellow main streamer mains &ldquo;regain Hong Kong&rdquo;, which is ironic but also sorrowful to me as a Chinese. Hong Kong is part of China, the government gave them privilege but people only want to split from China.
bio: Xinyuan Ding is a third-year multimedia and communication study student in Mcmaster University.
---

Hong Kong’s protestation has proceeded for several months, it appeared to be the
biggest demonstration yet. It started with the amendment to the fugitive
offenders ordinance. It was triggered by a murder of a Hong Kong man in Taiwan.
Last year, Tongjia Chen murdered his girlfriend in Taiwan and returned to Hong
Kong, unfortunately there was no extradition agreement between the two places,
the Taiwan government can not arrest him. After this case, Hong Kong published
the new fugitive offenders ordinance, which irritated the masses. In their
thoughts, their basic civil liberty has been offended, the last wall of “one
country, two systems” has been canceled due to this amendment ( which means Hong
Kong government had no power to decide things happened in Hong Kong, they became
puppet controlled by the centre government).  Chinese government makes several
different approaches to stop the more violent, some have done so in part by
setting up account on the platforms for its state-run news outlets, such as
China Daily, to make a public case for its views. (Zhong, Myers, &Wu,2019)
Another approach used in Twitter and Facebook is using fake accounts to
manipulate opinions surreptitiously.

In Marwick and Boyd’s (2010) article, they studied how people using social media
platform Twitter imagine their audiences and what strategies they use to
navigate their audiences. Personal homepage creators thought of their work as
constructed for the public, what they post is based on their imagination to
their audience.

Zhong, Myers, and Wu (2019) convey Chinese government is using Twitter as their
weapon to against with Hong Kong protesters. Social media platforms like
Facebook, Instagram and Twitter, are banned in China, but those opinions posted
by fake accounts were tracked to addresses in Beijing. Twitter noticed this
action and took down nearly 1000 account which were part of a state-directed
effort to undermine the antigovernment protests in Hong Kong, they also
suspended 200000 accounts also related to Chinese operation.

Due to Marwick &Boyd’s perspective, many writers, bloggers write their post
based on their fictitious audience, who may not actually read.The imagined
viewers are only presented in a digital way like serve logs or comments. The
Chinese government administers over more than 2 millions people work for them to
administer the fake accounts on Twitter, they assume their audiences are those
ethnic Chinese. Those people living overseas, they may not know what’s
happening, those accounts aim to deliver the message the Chinese government want
them to know. Those men in power in Chinese government see through the way to
manipulate viewers commendably, but they used a snaky way to do it. The approach
they use may mislead the people who don’t take part in the particular situation.

From the opposite perspective, though the way the Chinese government uses is
kind of insidious, they are forced to do it. The starting point of the Hong Kong
protests may be good, but as the join of young cynic, the protest upgraded to a
violent act, the masses life had been affected immensely. Those violators
attacked the crowd without distinction, the masses got injured. Surprising, more
daily routine and people were ripply effected. Police’s fingers had been bitten
of bloodily; journalist was illegally tied up and beaten by insurrectionists in
public, thousands people were stranded at Hong Kong Airports and flights were
delayed. 

“One country, two systems” strategy is used in Hong Kong based on its colonial
history and sensitive relationship with mainland. Due to this strategy, the
mainland centre government is not allowed to intervene the Hong Kong government,
unless the issues get out of Hong Kong government’s hand. This is a situation
that the citizens in Hong Kong do not want to see more. The centre government’s
intervene would make them loose their particularities and benefits. At  present,
the centre government’s movement seems more reasonable. The trick they use on
Twitter is a euphemistic way to spread the politically correct opinion. 

“How China unleashed Twitter trolls to discredit Hong Kong’s protesters

“How China unleashed Twitter trolls to discredit Hong Kong’s protesters”
analyzed the situation’s appearance, however they didn’t think in a deeper
level, what’s the reasons for a great and impressive country to pay a lot of
attentions on releasing hearsay, and why China choose social media like Twitter
which is banned in mainland to engage in a fight of words.

## Resources

Marwick, A. E., & Boyd, D. (2010). I tweet honestly, I tweet passionately:
Twitter users, context collapse, and the imagined audience. New Media &
Society, 13(1), 114–133. doi: 10.1177/1461444810365313

Zhong, R., Myers, S. L., & Wu, J. (2019, September 18). How China Unleashed
Twitter Trolls to Discredit Hong Kong's Protesters. Retrieved from
https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2019/09/18/world/asia/hk-twitter.html.
