---
bio: >-
  Jasmin Eng is a third year Communication Studies and Multimedia student at
  McMaster University. She has an interest for graphic design, animation and
  film studies, her goal in life is to one day work for Adult Swim.
email: engj5@mcmaster.ca
image-description: If you do not like your face make a new one!
web: 'https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCF0Oiikuo1nmW2SZtbfjACw?view_as=subscriber'
lname: Eng
fname: Jasmin
title: Keep Your Face, I Have My Own!
---

### If you do not like your face, make a new one!

 

In the digital age, technology has shifted the way individuals approach privacy,
communication and career opportunities. Privacy was once valued as a way to keep
certain information secluded. Recently privacy has shifted “as something to
escape from rather than to preserve as a precious political right” (Giroux,
2015). Our ways of communication have taken a creative approach, rather than
talking on the phone and sending text messages, individuals can communicate
through videos, photographs and live broadcastings. Additionally, various career
opportunities have risen through communication such as *Instagram* influencers,
YouTubers and *Twitch* streamers. On various media platforms, these individuals
share their thoughts, interests and lives with the world.

The Vice article titled *“This Software Will Give You a Fake Face to Protect
Your Privacy”* speaks upon researchers from the Norwegian University of Science
and Technology who have developed a software “that superimposes new faces onto
an individual while they move and speak online” (Cole, 2019). *DeepPrivacy*
“uses generative adversarial networks (GANs) to swap the original face with the
1.47 million faces from the YFCC100M dataset, which are made up of 100 million
Creative Commons-licensed face images on Flickr” (Cole, 2019). This software was
created with the intent to protect the privacy of online streamers, although
*DeepPrivacy* technology would not protect nor benefit individuals with an
online presence, it would only limit their success.

 

### Social Media and Digital Tracking

Digital tracking is a method websites use to collect an individual's browsing
habits. As Gary Wolf stated, “people are always tracking something”(Wolf),
whether it is an object, their family or themselves. For instance, Apple watches
allow users to track their step count, heart rate and menstruation cycle. In the
twenty-first century, individuals have begun to use the social platforms:
*Instagram*, *YouTube* and *Twitch* to track and share their lives with the
public. *Instagram* is a social media platform in which individuals can share
photographs and videos on their story and profiles. “Phone photography gives
rise to a cultural form reminiscent of the old fashioned postcard: snapshots
with a few words attached that are mostly valued as a ritual of
reconnection”(Van Dijck, 2008). Individuals in the twenty-first century have
short attention spans. *Instagram* is a platform used to past time, people
quickly scroll to see snapshots of their friends lives with short captions
attached. Moreover, YouTubers communicate with their fanbase through the form of
video as they upload content a few times a week ranging from the categories of
daily vlogs, makeup tutorials or game reviews. Lastly, *Twitch* streamers
communicate with their audience through the form of live broadcasting. A
streamers content can consist of either a conversation with their fans and/or
playing and reviewing a video game.

 

### Sharing As A Career

*Instagram* influencer, YouTubers and *Twitch* streamers do not solely
communicate and share their lives for amusement, they do it as a career. The
main factor to obtain a career as an *Instagram* influencer are shoutouts. A
company will message an Individual with a large following and tell them what to
post and the amount of money they are willing to pay. In addition, when an
individual obtains an even larger following companies will send the creator
products and clothing to post and promote on their profile. The two components
which lead to a successful *YouTube* career are views and advertisements. The
number of views an individual obtains is determined by the use of clickbait,
title and content of the video. Furthermore, if an individual monetizes their
video they will be able to obtain advertisements. These advertisements play
throughout the creator’s video and when a viewer watches the full ad the
YouTuber will make a small profit. Lastly, *Twitch* streamers earn profit
through subscribers, bits and direct donations. On *Twitch* individuals can
subscribe to a streamer for five to twenty-five dollars per month, in which half
the money will go to the streamer and the other half to *Twitch*. Secondly, bits
are animated emojis in which viewers can purchase when they are commented in the
live chat window of a stream the streamer obtains a small profit. Lastly, if a
viewer strongly admires a streamer and the content they are producing they can
send a direct donation of any amount of money.

A large component of obtaining a successful career as an internet influencer is
to be public. To attract an online audience, individuals must share their
hobbies, personality and lives with the world. When an individual shows their
face in a video or photograph it provides a level of intimacy, as well as blurs
the line between the creator and the viewer. On *Twitch*, streamers have the
option of using “FaceCam” which is a camera that shows a live video of the
individual as they stream. Showing one’s face online can make a significant
difference in the number of viewers and subscribers an individual earns. For
example, video game streamer *LIRIK* does not use “FaceCam” and has a total of
2.5 million followers, whereas *Shroud* a video game streamer who does use
“FaceCam” has 7 million followers.

 

### Protect Yourself!

In the article *“This Software Will Give You a Fake Face to Protect Your
Privacy”* the creators stated the main purpose for *DeepPrivacy* is to protect
the privacy of online streamers because individuals who are trying to hide their
faces have been resorting to low-tech anti-surveillance camouflage.
*DeepPrivacy* claims they can solve this issue because their “algorithms can
change identities and be used for good instead of for harassment or media
manipulation” (Cole, 2019). Yes, internet influencers can be put into dangerous
situations as a result of sharing and tracking their lives online, although,
hiding an individual's face as a mean of protection is not the ideal resolution.
For instance, *Twitch* streamer *Veefroggy* had a few incidences that could have
led to dangerous situations such as harassment and theft. Firstly, on her
stream, an individual commented her parents’ full names, which could have led to
her family members being harassed online or in public. Secondly, a *Domino’s*
delivery guy who had previously delivered to her house comment her address
during a live stream. In both situations, *Veefroggy* immediately ended her
stream and band the two individuals who were sharing her personal information,
rather than resorting to advanced technology such as *DeepPrivacy*.

 

### Conclusion

There have been numerous technological advancements that have been beneficial
additions to our society, a few of which are Bluetooth, 3D printers and
self-driving cars. Although a face anonymization software like *DeepPrivacy*
would not protect or benefit internet workers, it would only limit their
success. Jobs in the digital age call for communication and engagement and when
an individual shows their face online, it eludes a sense of interaction and
intimacy between the creator and viewers. As a result, privacy is no longer
valued by society because everyone willingly publicizes, tracks and shares their
lives with the world.

 

### Citations

Cole, S. (2019, September 17). This Software Will Give You a Fake Face to
Protect Your Privacy. Retrieved October 3, 2019, from
https://www.vice.com/en_us/article/ne87pg/deepprivacy-fake-face-anonymized-algorithm.

Giroux, H. A. (2015). Selfie Culture in the Age of Corporate and State
Surveillance.

Van Dijck, J. (2008). Digital Photography: Communication, Identity, Memory.

Wolf, G. (2017, July 30). The Quantified Self. Retrieved October 3, 2019, from
https://www.ted.com/talks/gary_wolf_the_quantified_self/transcript?language=en.
