---
title: Taking the Reins of Digital Privacy
lname: Gandhi
fname: Khaleel
email: gandhk4@mcmaster.ca
web: linkedin.com/in/khaleel-gandhi-aa8a37142/
image-description: A phone showing the Twitter mobile app. In focus, an article embedded in the timeline, reading &ldquo;what should you do over Reading Week in Hamilton?&rdquo;
bio: Khaleel Gandhi is a third-year student at McMaster University, studying theatre, film, and multimedia. His focus is on how untold stories can be shared through a combination of these media, while also developing new technical storytelling techniques along the way. Outside of his life, he enjoys spending time with friends, watching good TV, and eating the occasional fine cuisine.
---

Privacy. A term that you’ve probably always heard, particularly in the age of
digital technologies and our never-ending reliance on social media. You’ve
likely heard something along the lines of “be careful what you post” from a
parent or mentor. That’s certainly true – the many instances of doxing we’ve
seen lately will tell you that (Quodling, 2015). But even the things you don’t
post can now be exposed, making the lines between what is private and public
knowledge blurrier than ever. Advertising agencies, governments, and unsolicited
strangers have an increasing amount of ability to access your personal
information. Internet privacy legislation has been tried, but proven hard to
pass.

What exactly do we do about privacy? The reality is it comes down to you. We
can’t rely on legislation to make our digital lives more private – we have to
take it upon ourselves to separate our digital and real selves.

The first thing that might come to mind as a solution is: “Well, I’ll just be
careful what I post and avoid sharing anything that could get me in trouble.” On
the surface, that seems reasonable. But people can access your private browsing
history, too – and I’ll be that’s something you don’t voluntary make available
for the world to see.

A 2017 article from The Atlantic recently revealed that a group of researchers
at Stanford and Princeton universities could use an algorithm to accurately
identify someone’s Twitter profile by looking at their browser history accessed
through the app (Waddell). The researchers operated under the idea that any
individual is more likely to click a link shared on social media by a friend (or
friend of a friend) than any other random link floating on the internet
(Waddell). They applied this assumption to 400 individuals who volunteered their
browser history: a person’s tendency to follow links they come across reveals
their profile history, and in just a few minutes, too.

The algorithm looked for a proprietary URL shortener that Twitter uses – t.co –
which basically makes it easy to figure out which websites people arrived at
through that social media platform. For each individual, the study pulled around
100 recently visited links with the t.co shortener and ran these links through a
de-anonymization program. This gave the top 15 Twitter profiles the system
thought could be the ones who accessed the t.co links, in order of confidence.
Volunteers were asked if their profile was listed and signed in to Twitter to
prove their identity. The results? 72% of the time, the system picked the right
profile as its first choice, and 81% of the time, the correct profile was in the
top 15 (Waddell, 2017).

It’s not just what you post that can be revealed. It’s also your browser
history. While this study focused on browser history accessed through Twitter,
it’s not a stretch to assume a similar process could be applied to links you
access through other platforms.

To be fair, these browser histories were voluntarily handed over to the
researchers. But it’s not that hard for advertising agencies, Internet Service
Providers (ISPs) and unwanted spies to track your history. As the article points
out, ad blockers are not a tool commonly employed by the everyday web user, ISPs
can access details about your browser history, and (if we’re being honest)
unwanted tech-savvy stalkers could, too (Waddell, 2017). If you’re an average
internet user, who doesn’t think twice about employing ad blockers or using
encrypted websites, your privacy is basically non-existent. And when you couple
that with the extensive metadata accessible from any email you send, tweet you
share, or even coffee you buy, basically your entire lives can be (if they are
not already) involuntarily accessible with strangers – including the things you
don’t publicly post on social media (O’Neil, 2014).

Disconcerting, to say the least. We naturally aren’t comfortable with the idea
that any public statement we make online could be met with social rejection
(Baker, n.d.) – for example, making a right-leaning opinion in a more liberal
circle. Consider what would happen if people’s private browsing histories were
revealed.

Various people have tried to advocate for more internet privacy in order to
combat the issues I’ve just outlined above. People have called privacy a most
basic human right a most basic human right, saying it must grow and develop just
like freedom of expression did centuries ago (Altshuler, 2019). Others argue
that companies should be more transparent about what they do with our data
(Chamorro-Premuzic, 2015). But when “data transparency” is in the form of
long-winded legal agreements that people must “agree” to for dozens of different
apps, and data breaches don’t seem to have an impact on the millions of dollars
advertising agencies make, calls for improved privacy don’t seem to get
anywhere.

We have to take it upon ourselves to be more calculated about our digital
selves. When the internet took flight, we gave up our anonymity and made our
online personalities and real personalities too similar, blurring the lines
between what was private and what was public. But our whole lives – public and
private – are being broadcasted. The only solution is to think more critically
about **everything** we do online.

That might mean not using unsecure Wi-Fi networks to share an opinionated
Facebook post or being more careful about the tweets you like. But it needs to
go deeper than that: if you don’t normally think twice about an action you take
online, then you should be more critical about that action. This could include
but is not limited to: the websites you visit, where you send emails from (and
from what kinds of networks), where you activate your location/GPS, the things
you view on “incognito” mode – the list goes on.

You have to think: “if my internet history and online activities were exposed,
would I be fine with it?” If the answer is yes, then keep doing what you’re
doing. But if the answer is no, then consider changing what your digital self is
doing. If it means separating your personal thoughts and opinions and being more
performative online, in order to preserve your privacy, then I’d argue you
should absolutely do that.

This is not to say you should be completely fake on social media. Nor am I
suggesting you should completely cut yourself off from the Internet (because
let’s be honest, the way our society is structured would not allow for that).
But I am saying that you should think twice about giving over your life stories
to the Internet, what links you visit (particularly if they would result in some
sort of social rejection), and carefully manage your digital self so that it’s
an **extension** of yourself, but not a **fully realistic version**, with all
your secrets and things you don’t want getting revealed to outside parties.

The burden for managing our digital selves and its relationship to our personal
selves has become exponentially more pervasive. But that burden has always been
on us to uphold: whether or not you draw the curtains to our homes have always
been our responsibility. Same goes for our activities on the Internet. True
online privacy is highly unlikely, so it is on each one of us to take the reins
and control our image.

 

References
----------

Altshuler, T.S. (2019, September 26). Privacy in a digital world. Retrieved
September 30,   from
https://techcrunch.com/2019/09/26/privacy-queen-of-human-rights-in-a-digital-world/.

Baker, M. (n.d.). Containing Multitudes. Retrieved October 2, 2019, from
https://alwaysreadthemanual.com/read/issues/5/mills-baker/article.html.

Chamorro-Premuzic, T. (2015, September 24). How different are your online and
offline personalities? Retrieved September 30, 2019, from
https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2015/sep/24/online-offline-personality-digital-identity.

O’Neil, L. (2014, March 7). Why privacy worries won’t drive me off social media.
Retrieved September 29, 2019, from
https://www.cbc.ca/news/trending/digital-surveillance-won-t-drive-me-off-social-media-lauren-o-neil-1.2562551.

Quodling, A. (2015, April 21). Doxxing, swatting and the new trends in online
harassment. Retrieved October 4, 2019, from
https://theconversation.com/doxxing-swatting-and-the-new-trends-in-online-harassment-40234.

Waddell, K. (2017, February 6). Your Browsing History Alone Can Give Away Your
Identity. Retrieved September 29, 2019, from
https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2017/02/browsing-history-identity/515763/.
