---
title: Culture or Copyright? How Memes are Blazing a New Trail of Fair Use
lname: Gillier
fname: Ethan
email: ethangillier@gmail.com
web: instagram.com/mac_slasher/?hl=en
image-description: Artist Matt Furie’s “Pepe the Frog” redrawn and posted by anonymous 4chan user, playing with Pepe the Frog cops and robbers action figures.
bio: Ethan Gillier is a multimedia student attending McMaster University in Hamilton, Ontario, Canada, currently completing his third year of his Honours Multimedia (B.A.). Ethan has been working on a short horror film which he co-wrote, directed and produced in collaboration with his cousin Justin Symes. The film is yet to be released, and is a found footage slasher film with a twist. Ethan is an avid video game player, film connoisseur and fashion lover.  
---

Copyright infringement and fair use in media are in no way a fresh issue, throughout the history of television and movies there has been a never-ending struggle of defining what is and isn’t fair use of someone else’s content. Is it ok to remix or feature a piece of art to create something new? Or are we copying or negatively appropriating the original artist’s intellectual property? These struggles only become more confusing and uncharted when it comes to contemporary media, such as remixes, reaction videos and maybe the strangest case, memes.

The idea of intellectual property certainly isn’t a new concept and doesn’t necessarily change in the context of contemporary media, although it does become more blurred and difficult to determine. For example, memes are a relatively new development that are essential in the context of the internet and have become their own subculture. The culture of memes directly relies on the appropriation and remixing of others content or creations, as the basis of memes are repetitive jokes that are born from this appropriation of content. Memes are a phenomenon as they thrive from building off one another to grow, yet almost always die as they become too repetitive and contrived. This may sound lazy or cheap, but I don’t feel that way. I feel that meme culture has a realness to it, where the original content isn’t being copied or stolen, but rather used as an outlet for new content to be born. In the true form of memes there are no individuals claiming memes as their own property, rather the internet is collectively creating and claiming these memes as their own culture to be created and shared amongst each other.

That being said, I recognize that not all memes are favourable, fair use or even morally permissible. That is where the struggle comes from, where we as a collective (the internet) are discussing where memes and content in general go from healthy creation to malignant appropriation. We need to be able to create content that is inspired by original works, and borrows honourably from these works in order to have a healthy culture that can continue to create and share this content.

One of the earliest and most widely renowned memes of all time is “Pepe the Frog” or just Pepe for short, which was originally created by Matt Furie as a character in his comic “Boys Club” which he posted to MySpace in 2005. Pepe is hand drawn green frog that looks somewhat humanlike, and has a goofy and funny looking appearance. When Furie originally created the comic he had no intentions of Pepe becoming such a huge meme, and the memes that ensued portrayed Pepe in a plethora of ways, some similar to the original Pepe and some completely different. Internet users began to redraw Pepe in the same art style, in new scenarios or with new expressions and outfits to fit whatever narrative or situation they wished. Soon Pepe became a default template for whatever meme or cause the internet saw fit, which I believe in a sense was a healthy and fair use of Furies creation of Pepe. Sure, the new Pepes were not what Furie had in mind, yet they all brought something new and interesting to the culture. Pepe although being a long running meme and an extensively played out meme still somehow felt relevant no matter what, which is very rare in terms of memes.

More importantly, these memes didn’t have any sinister motives. There was no money being made, there was no there was no political ideology being pushed on others and no one claiming or guarding there remixes of Pepe as solely their own. Sadly Pepe was soon claimed by hateful internet groups such as the alt-right, incels and kek who used the meme as a symbol of hate-speech. Much to Furies anger he could not control the internet’s use of his creation on a large scale, and condemned these hateful groups use of Pepe as their symbol of hatred. Furie explained that the original Pepe he created was much the opposite, and was a relaxed happy individual that loved and cared for his friends. Although Furie could not micromanage the internet and eradicate all the undesirable appropriations of his creation, he could focus his efforts on mass scale corporations abusing the use of Pepe.

One example of this was Alex Jones from “Infowars” who is known to be a supporter of the right, appropriating Pepe for posters he sold on their website that featured Pepe in conjunction to other figureheads of the right (Epstein, 2019). Not only was Jones abusing Pepe for political motives that Furie has voiced discontent to, he was also making a profit off the poster without giving any consultation or compensation to Furie. This situation in a way perfectly embodies the negative aspects of memes and meme culture, there are profits being made immorally, there are hateful views conveyed and the original artist has no control and is expressing discontent. Fortunately Furie took legal action and filed a lawsuit against Jones, which went to court and was decided that jones did in fact breach the copyright. Furie won the lawsuit, Jones had to cease his use of Pepe along with paying 15,000$ in a settlement to Furie. This is important for the history of memes and the history of fair use in contemporary media, this demonstrates that this abuse of memes and pure content will not be tolerated. As voiced by Louis Trompo, Furies lawyer that represented him in the case “ ‘Matt [Furie’s] going to enforce his copyrights aggressively to make sure nobody else is profiting off associating Pepe the Frog with hateful imagery,’ Tompros said” (Epstein, 2019). 

Personally, I look at this as a victory for fair use and meme culture that will set a precedent for years to come. Many have addressed this situation with concern that it will hurt meme culture, leading to more unnecessary lawsuits and copyright claims on fair use content. I understand the sentiment, but I don’t fear that will be the case. This is an example of an abuse of memes being rectified, Jone’s was not using Pepe as fair use and if we lump in the abuse of memes as fair use than we lose the sanctity of it. Persecuting the wrongful use of content is just as important as protecting the fair use of content, and in order for memes to be healthy and progressive as a culture we as a collective need to understand that. 

## References

Epstein, K. (2019, June 11). Pepe the Frog's creator just won a $15,000 copyright settlement against Infowars. Retrieved October 3, 2019, from https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2019/06/11/pepe-frogs-creator-just-won-copyright-settlement-against-infowars/.
Placido, D. D. (2017, May 9). How 'Pepe The Frog' Became A Symbol Of Hatred. Retrieved October 3, 2019, from https://www.forbes.com/sites/danidiplacido/2017/05/09/how-pepe-the-frog-became-a-symbol-of-hatred/#4957fbe426bf. 
