---
title: Real Posts&#58; Instagram, Authenticity and Mental Health
lname: Grilli
fname: Aylen
email: grilla1@mcmaster.ca
web: 
image-description: Example of mental-health related meme. 
bio: Aylen is an undergrad student at McMastter University, studying Communication Studies. She lives in Mississauga and works part time as a waitress. 
---

Earlier this summer, while a few of us hung out after having some dinner, a friend opened up about her experiences with mental health. For years she had struggled with anxiety and depression, with which she had only now been diagnosed. Others had similar experiences, and I listened silently to a frank yet casual conversation about medication, group therapy and death. Without knowing what else to say, I asked if there was anything I could do to help. “I find it helps to just laugh about it,” she told me. As examples she talked about the dark inside-jokes she has with her coworker, and the sorts of memes she likes to share online. She showed me the sort of thing she was talking about, which I had seen before on Instagram and Twitter. Only this time, hearing from her about how that content was so helpful, I realized there was more to those posts than I realized.

Thinking back on that conversation, I was later reminded of something I had read somewhere, or heard, about young people and how we joke about mental health on social media. And I’m reminded of that again as I read Carrie Battan’s (2019) piece in the New Yorker, about the “Getting Real Post on Instagram”. The author explains that Instagram posts that seem natural and honest are perceived as being more authentic, which is what users respond to lately. Unedited photos, less makeup, and conversations about ‘real’ things like mental health are preferred over the glamorous and artificial. I think this is a positive change. The desire for such content means that young people are perhaps more willing to talk about issues of mental health and are reminded that even the most celebrated influencers have flaws and insecurities.

The author is critical, however. Her first concern is that such authenticity is incompatible with a platform like Instagram, as the platform itself is actually responsible for making youth unhappy. Viewing near flawless images makes one more aware of their own shortcomings. I think that getting ‘real’, may help, as it is a moment in which everyone is reminded of the superficiality of social media and the reality of related issues such as mental health. Battan identifies a deeper problem, however. As authenticity starts to ‘sell’, influencers will only aim to appear authentic and ‘real’, which may only further drive us towards dishonesty.

The platforms’ “networked audience” may further motivate such dishonest ‘authenticity’. As Marwick and Boyd (2010) discuss, the way information is shared on platforms like Twitter and Instagram makes the potential audience of a post unknowable and limitless (16-17). When a user posts something, especially influencers who depend on the platform for their livelihood, they make decisions about what to post based on their idea of this audience. For example, part of the audience may prefer more ‘authentic’ content, while others prefer well-decorated images. Or the type of ‘authentic’ content the audience desires may vary; some may prefer honest conversations, others may find that uninvited or even triggering. As influencers strategically shape their content to appeal as widely as possible, the sort of ‘real’ content that influencers post may depend on these considerations. Here we risk confusing the ‘real’ for the appearance of the ‘real’.

Regarding influencers, I join Battan in her skepticism towards the “getting real” posts. But what about typical social media users, such as my above-mentioned friend? It seems such users would have less incentive to fake ‘getting real’. Marwick and Boyd found that users with less followers may prize authenticity for its own sake, or at least without advertising opportunities. (11) This doesn’t mean that such users will post just anything. Considerations of audience still determine what is appropriate and what is not, often through self-censorship (12). For example, typical social media users would avoid posting something that they wouldn’t want their family, friends or employers to read. In the case of my above-mentioned friend, the content she posts regarding mental health only goes as far as occasionally sharing edgy jokes others have posted or posting supportive comments on other’s mental health-related posts.

In short, considerations regarding multiple audiences on social media still shape the sort of content even typical users post. But as conversations about things such as mental health are increasingly accepted, maybe thanks to influencers, the content considered appropriate on such platforms changes. A topic maybe once considered too personal for social media is now accepted, or even expected. Again, if this means that young people are more willing to publicly discuss issues of mental health, then I think the ‘getting real’ trend is positive.

However, such posts are no replacement for face-to-face conversation, and that should not be forgotten. For while some people are reluctant to post any such content online, I’ve also witnessed the opposite, namely, someone who frequently posted about mental health online yet never discussed such things in person, even with close friends. Looking at this persons’ timeline, one would think that they are committed to the cause of mental health, for themselves and for others. This was, in part, one of those cases where ‘real’ posts were shared for the sake of appearing ‘authentic’, rather than an authentic interest or concern for the topic of mental health.

To conclude, I think the ‘getting real’ posts are a largely positive change but are limited in important ways. Firstly, as noted by Battan, one should not confuse authenticity and the mere appearance of authenticity. Secondly, despite the shifting understanding of what is appropriate on such platforms, users decide what to post through considerations of their imagined audience. Even ‘real’ posts are likely to be reserved. This means one cannot expect Instagram and Twitter to replace the sort of human interaction that people such as my above-mentioned friend benefit from. That being said, the broader acceptance of topics such as mental health on social media is a positive change.

References 
Battan, Carrie. (October 1, 2019). The Rise of the “Getting Real” Post on Instagram. The New Yorker. Retrieved from
https://www.newyorker.com/culture/culture-desk/the-rise-of-the-getting-real-post-on-instagram
Marwick, Alice E. and Danah Boyd. (2010). I Tweet Honestly, I Tweet Passionately: Twitter Users, Context Collapse, and the Imagined Audience, new media & society XX(X), 1–20.
