---
title: It’s Just a Meme, Bro. 
lname: Gujadhur
fname: Akash 
email: gujadhua@mcmaster.ca
web: instagram.com/akashg713
image-description: Pepe the Frog looking sadly at his hands. 
bio: Akash Gujadhur is a fourth-year student attending McMaster University in Hamilton, Ontario, Canada, majoring in Communication Studies. When Akash is not procrastinating his assignments, he spends his time being involved with the McMaster community by, playing on the university’s competitive Ultimate Frisbee team and serving on his faculties executive members committee as the Communication Officer. He hopes to pursue further schooling upon completion of his undergrad but still unsure of what he would like to specialize in. Akash is looking forward to completing his undergraduate career and taking on whichever adventure comes next. 
---

A common misconception that is forgotten when using the internet, is that whatever is said and done online will forever be available to anyone with a wifi connection. The worldwide web is a massive domain that some are cautious about when browsing through social media, while others post, repost, share, tweet or story freely without ever wondering what could potentially happen with those images. In an article written by Jose van Dijck, he defines the action of exchanging digital images as “distribut[ing] storage” and goes on to say that “personal ‘live’ pictures distributed via the internet may remain there for life, turning up in unforeseen contexts, reframed and repurposed” (Dijck, 2008, pg.68). Over and over again, growing up, I remember being told never to post pictures of myself online due to the fear that someone would rob my identity or alter the image and publish it with negative intentions. We live in an era where applications like photoshop and similar software are easily accessible to anyone without any need for professional training. The average joe can download an image and alter it to portray it to be something else. 

Posts are generated by the minute from users from all over the globe on several major platforms, however, only a sparse amount of them make it to the big leagues. When content has received a plethora of attention or popularity it is typically deemed “viral”. To go viral in our lifetime is almost everyone’s social media goal whether it be by becoming Insta famous, or Youtube famous, tweeting a relatable post or the end of all goals, becoming a meme. Now in the event, you reach this online “celebrity” status where the content you generate is constantly going viral, how do you regulate who distorts, alters, reposts or shares your content? If you create a meme and millions love it, and repost it, but then alter the caption to make it relevant to their lives and that gains attention, is that an act of plagiarism? The question then has to be asked, are memes a free for all that can be used like any stock image? Or can you be sued for sharing and profiting off of them? The answer… apparently?

In early 2018, the conspiracy theorist we all love- Alex Jones, was sued by the creator of the Pepe the Frog meme, Matt Furie. He was first outraged due to Jones’ company (Infowars) using the frog meme on a poster and profiting off them. This was not the first case where Furie sued someone for using poor little Pepe, rather, Jones was the finale in a series of lawsuits that Furie had filed previously against others who violated Pepe’s persona. Furie had initially filed the complaint on the fact that Infowars had used Pepe as a model of propaganda for at the time, Presidential candidate Donald Trump who is not what Pepe’s political views reflect. This case was not settled in a first hearing and was sent to a jury however never took place. Instead earlier this year, the two parties came to an agreement in which conspiracy theorist Jones, “ha[d] agreed to pay a $15,000 legal settlement to the creator of Pepe the Frog, a cartoon character appropriated by the ‘alt-right’ that is now widely used in racist Internet memes” (Neuman, 2019, para.1). Jones’ legal team believed it to be a win because the original amount Furie was filing for was $2 million, however, Furie settled with the lower sum of money and even donated some of it to a local frog charity. The playing field has changed drastically with the introduction of the internet and new digital cultures, with photo manipulation being such a simple process the public must quickly recognize and acknowledge some of the repercussions it can have. Poor Pepe got brought into some dirty politics he never had asked for, he instead was the prototype case for issues revolving around the memeification of a picture and where exactly the copyright lies with cases such as this one. 

As a meme maker, you need to recognize the potential harm you may bring to the world when creating “dank memes” because oftentimes even if they are created with positive or humorous intention, they almost always will be altered with a negative twist and reposted. In Furie’s case I believe that he should not have received any financial compensation from Infowars because he knew the impact that Pepe had on society and even mentioned in an interview with The Atlantic in 2016 that ““[Pepe’s fame is] just out of my control, what people are doing with it, and my thoughts on it, are more of amusement” (Gault, 2019, para.6). The internet offers us several affordance which were outlined in a book written by Ryan Milner and Whitney Phillips, two of which are modularity which refers to “the ability to manipulate, rearrange, and/or substitute digitized parts of a larger whole without disrupting or destroying that whole” and modifiability which allows individuals to “repurpose and reappropriate aspects of an existing project toward some new end”(Milner, Phillips, 2018, para.31). Infowars acted within these affordances and created a new portrayal of a very viral and recognizable character to attract its target audience into what they were selling. Jones and his company did what almost every social media user does which manipulate an original meme and alter it to sell his point of view. In a digital culture where interacting with content is not only protocol, it has encouraged participants to “flatten contexts into highly shareable, highly remixable, texts: specific images, specific GIFs, specific memes” (Milner, Phillips, para.32). 

In light of this case being brought to attention, lawmakers thought that Pepe’s trial was going to be very beneficial and act as a sort of a call to action for copyright violations in terms of memes. They believed that if Jones was forced to pay damages which Furie claimed, it would have threatened meme culture more broadly. They saw this as a potential wake-up call to meme-makers to be able to monitor what happens with their original meme but that was not the case here. Jones still had to pay a fine but nothing changed in the meme world? Users are still reposting, altering and changing memes daily, I believe this is a problem we will not be able to solve unless the internet gains some sort of ethics police to screen any potential cases of illegally made memes. Which will not happen ever because that is the nature of the internet. It is a brutal and cut-throat place where very dark jokes are made and the most innocent characters or memes can and will be altered with negative or inappropriate messages sent. With constant exposure to negative but humorous memes, it creates a desensitized community, some believe that if people online would “lower their voices, stop posting rude memes, and quit with the name-calling”, that the general population could actually implement some ethical guidelines we had to follow if we wished to continue posting online (Milner, Phillips, para.3). In a utopian society, this would be a possibility but due to the massive population of users worldwide and over national borders, the internet will remain an ungoverned minefield. 

_Resources_

Dijck, J. V. (2008). Digital photography: communication, identity, memory. Visual Communication, 7(1), 57–76. doi: 10.1177/1470357207084865
Furie, M. (2019). Pepe the Frog. photograph. Retrieved from https://www.theguardian.com/books/2019/jun/13/pepe-the-frog-creator-wins-15000-settlement-against-infowars
Gault, M. (2019, May 17). Alex Jones's Pepe the Frog Copyright Trial Will Help Decide Who Can Use Memes. Retrieved from https://www.vice.com/en_us/article/nea3bq/alex-joness-pepe-the-frog-copyright-trial-will-help-decide-who-can-use-memes. 
Milner, R. M., & Phillips, W. (2018, November 20). The Internet Doesn't Need Civility, It Needs Ethics. Retrieved from https://www.vice.com/amp/en_us/article/pa5gxn/the-internet-doesnt-need-civility-it-needs-ethics. 
Neuman, S. (2019, June 11). Alex Jones To Pay $15,000 In Pepe The Frog Copyright Infringement Case. Retrieved from https://www.npr.org/2019/06/11/731520403/alex-jones-to-pay-15-000-in-pepe-the-frog-copyright-infringement-case. 
Price, R. (2019, September). Class Lecture: Social Image. Class Lecture: Social Image. Hamilton, On.
