---
bio: >-
  Ryan Price is an artist and educator living in Hamilton, Ontario, Canada, with
  an extensive background in traditional and interactive media. Ryan holds a
  bachelor of fine arts degree in photographic studies from Ryerson University
  as well as a master’s from McMaster University in Communications and New
  Media. He has worked as an instructor as several post-secondary institutions
  and was the design director of a weekly newspaper, overseeing editorial
  production. Ryan has many passions, all of which tie into art, technology, and
  education.
email: 
image-description: Dog chasing its own tail
web: 
lname: Hu
fname: Jinghan
title: The Stories Behind Social Platform
---

 

 

The article, entitled *The Secret Social Media Lives of Teenagers*, written by
Ana Homayoun, discusses that many teenagers spend most of their time using
social media. Therefore, the harsh environment of the Internet will directly
affect their life-altering decision. In addition, the author also takes up the
social issue of privacy-preserving and public access. It illustrates the
criticism of people’s vanity of their popularity, “all about the likes” seems
more valuable than real life. Through this article, I think it has something to
do with self-disclosure and privacy issues. Furthermore, vanity and the network
“filter” tend to lead people to convey a lot of ostensible content, affect the
way people absorb information, and blur the virtual and reality. 

 

Privacy and public are the common terms of the networks, but there is a
phenomenon of “publicly private”. It appears in the accounts of many young
people, exposing their entire lives, but set it as “private”. I agree that
people have the right to keep secrets and not to be distracted by unfamiliar
accounts. However, it is unknown that some people still take advantage of the
superiority to spread potential misdeeds. In this case, private accounts can
have a massive impact on teenagers’ view to some extent because they do not have
a strong sense of right and wrong yet. As mentioned in the article, some
students’ private group chat on Facebook has been exposed as containing mockery,
abuse, sexual assault, and other inappropriate memes. (Homayoun, 2017) This case
makes people wonder what they are thinking and even doing behind the so-called
“privacy” and privacy protection. Although they have the right to keep the
privacy of the group conversation, in other words, they may just hide from the
public. In the sense of youth age, it is not only the of identity development,
but also the stage of their discovery of value. Memes and pictures circulating
on the Internet are bound to arrant the attention of teenagers because they are
funny and vivid along with the text. However, teenagers do not notice that they
are oversharing the inappropriate images through a hidden group chat. “Publicly
private” is a way to protect yourself or hide and collecting data from others,
should be a seriously considered in teenagers’ social media. When they share
those memes in unknown places, they are prone to get into trouble, even they are
harmless.

 

 

In addition, social media as “second life” seems to be the opposite of “private
life”, because some young people behave so recklessly online to earn more
“Likes”. Vanity is a state of mind that everyone has. But teenagers are often
unable to reach the richness of the spiritual world, so they pursuit popularity
on social media to fill the vacancy and demonstrate their value. “On Instagram,
these digital double identities are reflected through Rinsta and Finsta
accounts.”said a news report on “fake” social media accounts. (Pringle, 2017)
That is, Rinsta represents strangers tracking and collecting “Likes” as real
accounts, on the other hand, Finsta is a fake account that only visible for
trusted friends. In this sense, the Finsta account is similar to the “publicly
private” mentioned above, which they hide from the public, but ironically, it
exposes the true self in a small community. Moreover, Rinsta is the real
account, and they spend a lot of time running it. They try very hard to capture
the perfect photos and edit them carefully. Hence, rather than sincere sharing a
beautiful picture, it is more about how to get the numbers of “Likes”.
Nevertheless, Instagram had launched a feature that hides the “Likes” counts
from the public, and hope it will significantly reduce the vanity competition.
This case presents how social media become a compilation of teenagers and cause
them to have dual identities as “second life” for a specific purpose. In order
to satisfy their vanity, people always put their best face forward to the
general viewers to get more “Like”.

 

The characteristic of social platforms often give people a beautiful impression
and illusion based on the account content. Sometimes we may not know the owner
of the account, but solely from social media, we tend to believe the posts under
their account is all he or she is. I called this phenomenon a “network filter”.
As mentioned above, people try to use different angles, postures, lighting, and
editing techniques to capture the perfect moments. In fact, in their lives, it
is only a moment of a second or less. Or even worse, it is photoshop’s work at
all. A story discusses a girl who posing for this fake photo on Facebook. She
says: “The picture of me lying on a tree was the only one I liked out of 500 I
took. I felt incredibly uncomfortable and had knobs and jagged pieces of branch
jabbing into my back.” (Benjamin, 2017) In the article, she honestly reveals the
fact behind those stunning photos. She was unhappy even she smiles, she looked
like enjoying her life but she cried on that day. However, if she does not
expose the behind, no one will know. The audience would only think of it as a
beautiful picture as she wanted to convey. Therefore, as content creators, they
can guide our impressions and thoughts of what they want us to think, share the
things they want people to view. Most of the time, the viewers are blur by such
“filter”, believing the virtual under the social platform is the reality.
Sometimes, we express appreciation and admiration for the unreachable life. But
the truth is, we are all the same, where in the place without “network filter”.

 

In conclusion, Ana Homayoun’s article has discussed the common terms of public
and privacy, criticizes the popularity as a kind of competition. In addition, it
involves the issue of hiding from the public, doing something as secret, but
inappropriate. A dual identity and “network filter” are all connected to vanity,
which they are inauthentic and deceptive. The lousy environment of the Internet
is definitely will affect everyone, especially teenagers. So being true to
yourself, is the most important thing.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Resources
---------

Pringle , R. (2017, September 11). Using a 'fake' social media account to reveal
your authentic self \| CBC News. Retrieved from
https://www.cbc.ca/news/technology/instagram-finsta-rinsta-ramona-pringle-1.4279550.

 

Benjamin, C. (2017, October 26). Take A Selfie; Fake A Life. Retrieved from
https://www.theodysseyonline.com/take-selfie-fake-life.

 

Homayoun, A. (2017, June 7). The Secret Social Media Lives of Teenagers.
Retrieved from
https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/07/well/family/the-secret-social-media-lives-of-teenagers.html.

 

 
