---
title: Personal Response Essay
lname: Leng
fname: Hongwei
email: lengh@mcmaster.ca
web: hongweileng.com
image description: photo of a blue ballpoint pen on white notebook by Med Badr Chemmaoui from Unsplash
bio: 
---

Crowdsourcing is a recently developed concept that aims to allow employers to outsource their tasks to the public via online platforms, where a crowd or a group of people could work towards a common goal on per contract basis. It is believed that crowdsourcing can greatly improve the efficiency of problem solving on various tasks and may elevate the quality of the work completed especially in terms of innovation. Due to its appealing nature and high affordability, crowdsourcing have quickly gained wide acceptance in the business world. However, there is still a strong voice that argues against this seemingly wonderful way of working out problems.

In a popular article titled “Crowd-Sourced Logos are a Bad Idea: Here’s Why”, the author, a logo designer, Ian Paget stood against the idea of crowdsourcing. Paget believes that crowdsourcing not only suffocates designer’s creativity, it may also hurt the image of the businesses should they choose to use crowdsourced designs. In his article, Paget first talks about why crowdsourcing is bad for those independent designers. He has noticed that most of the crowdsourcing websites are specifically tailored to suit the needs of the businesses. In other words, the ideals seeked by those independent designers working via the online crowdsourcing platforms are largely ignored. The first general rule in the logo designing crowdsourcing market is that the clients shall be fully refunded if they are not satisfied with any of the designs offered. The second general rule is that there is only one share of the reward, meaning only the bid winning designer may be awarded the payment amount. If we examine these rules carefully, we could see that they are undermining the interests of those independent designers. For instance, the uncertainty about whether the independent designers will get paid at the end of a job would prevent the contract designers from giving their full effort when handling tasks at hand. As a result, the combined result of these two rules can only lead to a destined result that the logo designers offering a bidding design would not want to invest 100% of their effort. 

I could easily understand and agree with the author’s point of view as I painted a mental picture where my instructor told the entire class at the beginning of the course that only the best response essay would be graded under the condition that the essay have met with the professor’s standards. Under such circumstances, I doubt anyone would even be bothering to do a decent job on this response essay since there are way too many competitors. I might as well allocate my precious resource, ‘time’, to study on something else that is more worthwhile. Although Paget has limited his scope of reasoning within the field of logo designing, I tend to believe the same logic can be generalized to other field of practice where crowdsourcing is heavily depended upon. Referring back to Semuels’ article “Internet is Enabling a New Kind of Poorly Paid Hell”, no matter the outsourced task is in the field of programming, survey fillers, or in the field of creative designs, it is equally highly unlikely for those independent employees overcome the challenges that they are facing let alone attempting to build a career out of crowdsourcing. Hence, I shall remain a critical towards working for these crowdsourcing platforms as it can be a dead end career path.

In the second part of the article, Paget spoke about why crowdsourcing is also harmful for the businesses. Paget highlighted that “branding is the face you show to the public”, and how the logo designs could ill reflect the company’s ideals and unique selling proposition. In simple logic, outsourcing a designing tasks to some stranger over the internet who may or may not share your company’s values is probably not in the best interest of the businesses. Although crowdsourcing may offer businesses a low-cost and convenient option however, it may backfire on the businesses if the designs created that are suppose to promote the company’s image does not align with the company’s core values. Crowdsourcing a logo design task can be especially harmful for start-up businesses. Once you entrust the design work to a designer who has never had a conversation with you in a room, never took time reviewing your existing materials, and never cared to learn about your company’s values, then ultimately, it is almost guaranteed that there will be a disconnect between their design and your business. Moreover, when the author has gone through those crowdsourcing platforms, he was able to quickly find over two dozen logos that shared phenomenally high degree of similarity. However small this representation may be, it is sufficient to demonstrate that there is a atmosphere of lack of devotion and effort during the creation process of those logo designs when proxied via crowdsourcing. Taking the discussion one step further, when business employers are bombarded with countless number of worthless logo designs, it contradicts the ideal of receiving professional guidance from design experts. 

I could not help but to agree with Paget that it is probably worthwhile to hire an in-house designer who understands what your business is all about. Although it may be significantly more costly at the beginning, however, by allowing an in-house designer to participate in early branding decisions and contribute their skills and insight. It would certainly payoff in the long run as the in-house designer could not only offer you a unique logo design, he or she could also create a design that is more in coherence with your business’s core values. It would be better off to hire an in-house expert in almost every other field of business outside of logo designing. Referring back to Semuls’ article, it is almost guaranteed that business employers will not be rewarded with above average quality responses from their outsourced tasks, when their contracted workers are constantly under stress from lack of financial stability and their lack of rounded awareness about the task at hand. Perhaps I will only consider to resort to the use of crowdsourcing if I have at least one in-house expert who could make an educated decision on my behalf.

## Resources

Paget, I. (2017, March 12). Crowd-Sourced Logos are a Bad Idea: Here's Why. Retrieved from https://logogeek.uk/logo-design/crowd-sourced-logos/.

Semuels, A. (2018, January 23). The Internet Is Enabling a New Kind of Poorly Paid Hell. Retrieved from https://www.theatlantic.com/business/archive/2018/01/amazon-mechanical-turk/551192/.


