---
title: The suburbanized identity 
lname: Li 
fname: Qifeng
email: liq54@mcmaster.ca
image-description: Streaming sites have resulted in the suburbanization of music Technology have resulted in the suburbanization of identity. This picture is trying to mimic the suburbanization of music and identity
bio: Qifeng Li third year Mmedia student at Mcmaster
---
In the essay penned by Adrian Shaughnessy titled “Music by the Numbers” for Design Observer, he describes the move from purchasing music records to online streaming services. As a self-proclaimed music-mad youth, he would covet certain records due to his inability to afford them. When he became financially able to obtain all the music he wanted, he took pleasure in seeking them out in stores that have floor-to-ceiling shelves packed with CDS, vinyl records, picture disc and box sets (2016). In today’s digital landscape however, one does not need to search long and wide for music, because we have online streaming services which Shaughnessy says “offer a cosmos of music in exchange for the physical expenditure of a few keystrokes, and a small monthly fee” (2016). There is no more unattainability that came with the music in the past. He feels a “mild sense of dislocation and disaffection from the world of music” (2016). He feels there was a connection between unattainability and attraction and so the loss of the former creates a decrease in the latter. There is no longer a “search, wait, and delayed gratification” which is what made music great.

 Online streaming services has also changed the culture of listening to music. New York Times music critic Ben Ratliff writes that “when you let the computers do the choosing for you, when you listen through if-you-like-x-you’ll-like-y recommendation engines, based on your perceived listening patterns” you lose out on the creativity that comes with finding something you’ve never listened to before, either through your own browsing or from friends and family (Shaughnessy, 2016). The general feeling of these services is that everything personal from the credits, the biographies, and the immaterial experience is gone, the metadata hidden. 

 Shaughnessy ends his essay with this poignant statement: “streaming sites have resulted in the suburbanization of music” (2016). I think that is an interesting thought to end on and the starting point of my own reflection on the topic. When I think about the suburbs, I think about the word normal. There are normal houses filled with normal families with normal belongings and habits. Of course the word normal is very subjective so for me, I would define it as a standard way of being that is accepted by the majority. In that sense, I can understand why streaming sites are the suburbs of music. Music recommendations are now done by computers with hidden formulas as Ratliff says which are very standardized. It is used to appeal to a mass crowd rather than to you.
 
 In a way, these new algorithms that comes along with the digital, narrows our field of vision. In Bruce Willen’s essay talking about UI design, he says the “increasingly engineered user experiences create mental ruts meant to lock in behavioural patterns” which I think decreases creativity and originality (2019). These music search engines are just one example of data-driven design that “offer us illusions of control and accomplishment which constraining our explorations within a shrinking environment of corporate content providers and platforms” (Willen, 2019). I think companies with the help of designers prioritize the creation of smooth and intuitive interfaces so that people, now seen as the “users”, can absorb the company’s information and offerings as quickly and effectively as possible. Convenience is what many designers strive towards with their designs. It seems like a favourable goal as we live in a world where time is treated as a commodity. Time is money and therefore the more productive you are with your time, the better you are - or so it seems.

 To me, the very notion that we are viewed as “users” is troubling. It speaks to our relationship with technology, in which we rely on apps and services to construct our lives and more importantly, our identity. Our music tastes are shaped by algorithms and our relationships are expressed through likes and thumbs up. How much has the digital culture shaped the collective consciousness and our minds? Bloggers Scott Karp and Bruce Friedman both suggest that the Internet has altered their mental habits. Friedman describes his reading having taken on a “staccato” quality: quickly scanning short passages of text. It is as if they don’t read not because they don’t want to but because they can’t anymore. Does that mean our need for efficiency and convenience has created people who have weakened capacity for engaged reading and interpretation?

 Who would we be, who would I be without our digital culture? I am not sure. It feels like I’ve never known of a life without it although I know that is not true. My childhood was not spent browsing youtube or on social media flicking through countless images. However, that is the reality for the generation after me. They have by all definitions grown up with digital media and so the way they create, consume, and share culture is entirely digital. This also means that their entire lives, and the majority of mine, have been monitored and documented.

 Our “purchases, preferences, politics, and perversions are … tracked, predicted, and sold” (Twemlow, 2016). Everything about us, our digital identities that we have created, can be siloed into different data groups and used by the government or other companies. It may be old news to some, completely new information to others, or varying degrees of awareness in between. For me, I fall somewhere in the in-between in which I was aware of the concept but reading the statement above is still very jarring. Nothing we do digitally is ours and ours alone. There is not private setting that actually protects our privacy. 

 As I am writing, I find myself struggling with the definition of good and bad, right and wrong. The things I have learned and reflected on leaves an uncomfortable feeling in the pit of my stomach. I feel like technology has changed me, molded my identity, taken away my privacy and I cannot decide if that is a good thing or bad thing. I use technology daily, in fact, I am using it right now as a way to document and express my thoughts. I am also listening to my curated Spotify playlist and texting my friends using emojis to express my feelings. I know to wear clothes for cold weather because my weather app told me so. I will be cooking dinner tonight based on a recipe I found through Youtube. I will never be lost with the location setting turned on and my maps app opened. Music isn’t the only thing that has been suburbanized. I too have been suburbanized. 

- Reference 
Lessard, S. (2019). Bird’s eye view of the suburbs. [Photograph]. Retrieved from lithub.com/why-do-we-hate-the-suburbs/

Shaughnessy, A. (2016, March 15). Music by the numbers. Design Observer. Retrieved  from www.designobserver.com/feature/music-by-the-numbers/39240

Twemlow, A. (2016, April 7). Dodging, dazzling, and divulging. Design Observer.    Retrieved from www.designobserver.com/article.php?id=39244
Willen, B. (2019, May, 9). In defence of inconvenience. Design Observer. Retrieved   from www.designobserver.com/feature/in-defense-of-inconvenience/40056

 
