---
bio: Rachel Lieske is a third year Communications student at McMaster University. Heavily experienced in both multimedia and communication, Rachel finds herself expressing much of her interests through a juxtaposition of work. Some tell stories through a divide of visual and audio worlds, taking a nuanced approach to story telling.
email: liesker@mcmaster.ca
image-description: robot love depicted mid kiss
web: 'https://rlieske4819.wixsite.com/portfolio'
lname: Lieske
fname: Rachel
title: How Humanizing Technology is  Dehumanizing us
---

## Why resorting to technology as a default solution is so dangerous

Technology advances fast, sometimes faster than we can predict it’s lasting
effects on our culture. The work of Hiroshi Ishiguro is no exception; a leading
Japanese designer known for his controversial work on the human connection and
android companionship. Although many refer to Ishiguro’s androids as ‘sex
robots’ they are much more complex. Ishiguro’s androids can understand,
interact, and above all provide intimacy. *There is however a great danger that
comes in humanizing technology that inadvertently dehumanizes us*. Ishiguro
designs break down human connection through the intentional design of unrequited
empathy, simplifying humans into algorithms, and promoting rape culture through
a subservient model. Despite Ishiguro seeing no harm in replicating human
connection with non-life forms, these self-motivated interactions with androids
create a dystopian reality for its users and disseminate a falsehood of
connection. This novel illusion of intimacy presents grave repercussions that
will continue to unveil as technology further manipulates the nature of the
human connection.

## Why empathy shouldn’t be optional 

Empathy is the backbone of society, begrudgingly pushing us to listen,
understand, and help each other in times of need. This is the missing component
from Ishiguro’s designs; the symbiosis found within empathy. Ishiguro’s androids
are created for those who desire human connection. These might be people who
struggle with social anxiety disorders, development issues or are chronically
lonely. Unfortunately, these simulations of human connection degrade the value
of empathy through egocentric design. In his article [Inadvertant Algorithmic
Cruelty](http://meyerweb.com/eric/thoughts/2014/12/24/inadvertent-algorithmic-cruelty/),
Eric Myers addresses the blunt and unempathetic nature of technology. Myers
makes a call for action, proposing the use of empathetic design in every facet
of technology (2014). The opposite occurs in the case of Ishiguro’s work. His
empathetic design exports emotional labor onto intimate objects and normalize
the egocentric dynamic within relationships. It is not empathetic design that we
need, but sourcing empathy outside of technology.

In an interview, Ishiguro explains how empathy is studied through slight facial
movements that trigger our so-called empathy-neurons (Mar, 2017). Although his
work is nuanced and intriguing, Ishiguro is studying how to export emotional
labor upon the inanimate, something that must have unimaginable repercussions.
The source of connection between humans and androids is ambiguous; if not from
shared empathy then from where? This connection is based on a delusion of
empathy, rather a reflection of the unempathetic version of ourselves. In his
article [Containing
Multitudes](https://alwaysreadthemanual.com/read/issues/5/mills-baker/article.html),
Mill Baker suggests that any relationship driven by technology allows us to hide
our multitudes (n.d.). Multitudes are the layered and complex elements of self
that make us susceptible to pain and rejection. Modern technologies like dating
apps allow us to approach communication with a digital mediator that filters
these pains and rejections (Baker, n.d.). Androids, on the other hand, allow us
to bypass these multitudes completely through exporting emotional labor, which
Baker suggests is harmful to society. Although mediation and exportation seem
like a tactile approach, these high riding and egocentric fronts compromise the
shared integrity of humanity.

## Humans are not algorithms, not something to be cracked

  
In defense of his radical designs, Ishiguro argues that human emotion and
connection is no less programmed than his androids. He explains how we are
programmed in the same way with neurons and hormones as his androids are with
wires and adaptors (Mar, 2017). This predictability allows Ishiguro to study
human connection and replicate it in his designs. He further argues that our
inner life is algorithmic, setting his life mission to cracking the code of
human connection (Mar, 2017). Despite Ishiguiro’s convincing plea for approval,
the human connection cannot be simplified and predicted as anatomically as he
suggests. This perspective forces us to view humankind as subjects to
manipulation which diminishes human fragility. Crossing the bridge of bioethics
and philosophy, the human connection is ambiguous for distinct reasons. There is
a reason why heartbreak exists, where you feel physical pain from emotional
trauma. A pain that can keep people mute, depressed, suicidal and even cause a
reactionary death. Attempting to calculate human connection is an injustice to
humanity and its dual performance of love and pain. In the same stride,
Ishiguro’s motivation to create clones in the hope to commemorate and preserve
personal identity is a disservice to the beauty of life and its temporary yet
firm hold. Author Jessica Helfand suggests that the process of design is
integral to the success of a design, “the process is as valuable as the product,
the method as potentially revelatory as the motive” (2016, p.54). In this case,
attempting to fuse algorithms and human connection by design is meek, shallow,
and doomed for failure.

But why does that matter if it fills a need? If it feels real?” Ishiguro
counters to the prior argument (Mar, 2017). His question is precisely answered
in his question, as the feeling shouldn’t ‘feel’ real, but should be ‘real’. In
allowing people to access false senses of intimacy, life and its intrinsic
truths are viewed through a faulty lens. It is comparable to convincing
ourselves that we are in love, even if it is not true love. It serves as a
temporary fix to a bigger issue masked by fears of intimacy and vulnerability.
Through this faulty lens, we begin to grow further and further apart and
misunderstand one another at greater capacities than ever before.

## How rape culture is promoted through the subservient android

Androids are crafted to be ideal models of humankind. They do not disagree, hold
grudges, or throw insults, otherwise, they would not sell. In the same context,
androids are not made to consent to sex because consent is not sexy.

The sexually subservient androids created by Ishiguro and other sex robot
companies project a faulty illusion as to how healthy relationships look and
function. It is indisputable that Ishiguro's androids are not dolls or toys,
they are complex and interactive systems that closely model human life. They are
not sex aids, but life companions which complicate how sex and intimacy are
reciprocated both inside and outside of the bedroom. The androids never refuse
sex, never demand accommodations and never climax, three very important elements
in a healthy sexual relationship. The role of subservient androids teach men
that they have a fundamental right to a woman's body, as they present no
restrictions (Bates, 2017). You can’t rape an android, but you can carry those
fragmented illusions of sexual relations with you into future relationships, and
that warrants great fear.

Besides the fear of promoting rape culture, sex robots also promote male-focused
sex, where all of the concern is put on the man and his climax. Of course, we
cannot expect an android to climax, but this is precisely the issue. When sex
becomes male-centered and partial, the focus dehumanizes the role of women in
sex and isolates them as an end goal to climax rather than an active partner. In
shifting the emotional and physical reliance on something that seems so real but
is not, we are doing a disservice to women. We are creating unhealthy and
unattainable dependencies and expectations among women and ignoring their role
in sexual pleasure completely.  


## In a plea to rebuild humanity

Ishiguro's intentions are innocent. With a long history of loneliness and
abandonment, he dedicates his life to studying the human connection and trying
to make it widely available. The mark that Ishiguro misses is the disservice
humanizing technology brings to the many facets of our lives. From reducing the
value of empathy, plugging humans into algorithms and ignoring the complex
lineage of sexual relationships and rape culture, trying to recreate human
connections prompts danger. Some facets of life are massively privileged and
enhanced by the use of technology, but in some cases, human life is far too
complex to replicate. The second we abandon human connection is the second that
technology reins too much power and mistakably dehumanizes us all.


## References

Baker, M. (n.d.). Containing Multitudes. Retrieved October 7, 2019, from
https://alwaysreadthemanual.com/read/issues/5/mills-baker/article.html. Bates,
L. (2017, July 17). The Trouble With Sex Robots. Retrieved October 7, 2019, from
https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/17/opinion/sex-robots-consent.html. Helfand, J.
(2016). Design: the invention of desire. New Haven: Yale University Press. Mar,
A. (2017, October 17). Are We Ready for Intimacy With Androids? Retrieved
October 7, 2019, from
https://www.wired.com/2017/10/hiroshi-ishiguro-when-robots-act-just-like-humans/.
Meyers, E. (2014, December 24). Inadvertent Algorithmic Cruelty. Retrieved
October 7, 2019, from
http://meyerweb.com/eric/thoughts/2014/12/24/inadvertent-algorithmic-cruelty/.
