---
title: A Roller Rink Ritual
lname: Lodu
fname: Alanna
web: 
email: lodua@mcmaster.ca
image-description: The Roller Rink at the Hangout Festival in Alabama with people taking photos along the sidelines.
bio: Alanna Lodu is a current student at McMaster University studying in the Multimedia Department. She thrives off of creative projects and artistic ways to express herself. She is most particularly driven in the field of acting, singing, and performing.
---

On a journey to present themselves in the most appealing "Instagrammable" way, millennials prioritize creating a fabricated persona online which subsequently obstructs their opportunities to explore genuine encounters in real life. In the article, _Honeymoon Hashtag Hell_, a couple shares their most unpleasant experience on a post-wedding vacation. The wife - like many, many others - is so consumed with the delivery of their event through Instagram photos that their destination, hotel, day trips, restaurants and more, are strictly determined by their prior-researched, Instagram appealing qualities. While this exact situation does not align with my life (yet), the concept of a photo-focused vacation is one that I see posted daily and experienced personally while vacationing with four girls.

This past May, myself and four of my university girlfriends took a road trip down to Gulf Shores, Alabama to attend the Hangout Music Festival on the beachfront while also indulging in the heat that had not yet hit southern Ontario. Going into this trip we were high on anticipation of the moments we were about to share together; swimming in the ocean, laying on the beach, hearing our favourite artists perform live in a foreign tropical setting, and exploring the town of Alabama. While the vacation consisted of all of these things, they seemed only secondary to the “necessary” photoshoots that would benefit their Instagram feeds. I couldn’t help but feel appalled by the amount of time spent trophy hunting the perfect shot, one day going to such extents as to paying for roller-blades for a few minutes just to be photographed with the retro set-up. If this was a situation devoted to indulging in the scenery, music, and thrill of roller-blading my attitude toward this specific event would be different, but it was nothing more than a chance to capture and post a phony experience. While my friend and myself sat off on the side snapping hundreds (literally hundreds) of photos of them, I remember listening to the live music playing from multiple venues around us; boy would this experience be different if it weren’t for Instagram. This roller-blading experience was symbolic to the remainder of our week together; less genuine interactions, more fabricated photo ops to capture the “essence of our vacation”.

Now, I didn’t always hold this perspective. I was never an avid photographer, nor was I ever jumping at the chance to be the subject of a photo; however, I was very consumed with my online profile and presentation. I would find myself feeling of lesser value when a photo didn’t attain as many likes, when I didn’t look like the girls on the trending page, and when I compared my “dull” life to the adventurous lives of many social figures. While so much of my confidence and credibility was gained from posts and likes on Instagram, I soon learned that those feelings were temporary and I would never be able to attain such high standards. For years my account slowly digressed to a few posts per year until I finally deleted it altogether, at this point I had learned that genuine encounters and experiences were far from the world of Instagram.

While I was fortunate enough to realize this, most millennials don’t; those that grow up in my generation and the next know nothing beyond the digital age that has dominated the majority of our lives. So, to them (and people of all ages) I would say be mindful of what you are exposing yourself to daily on social media; consider what you post, posts you engage with, and how often you engage with them. 

Studies show that the more time spent on social media the worse users report feeling. Due to the amount of unrealistic content that takes place on platforms like Instagram, I believe this is what leaves millennials longing for unrealistic standards of perfection in their content, and as a result, feelings of self-depreciation. Users are constantly being drawn to the profiles of celebrities and “influencers” whose feeds are filled with unrealistic body images, extravagant events, and expensive vacations. I fell victim to this façade when I was in high school. I believed that in order to be accepted and liked I needed to look a certain way and do certain things, and if I wasn’t able to communicate that to my online profile then I had no worth. My sense of belonging came from my identification with a community that is fake, unfriendly, and thrives off of artificial enhancements. 

In the article _I Tweet Honestly, I Tweet Passionately: Twitter Users, Context Collapse, and the Imagined Audience_, the imaged audience is a hot topic of discussion. We value whatever grabs the public’s attention (Marwick & Boyd, 2010). Users value the content of popular accounts/influencers and in return attempt to replicate the same content to feel a sense of belonging and validation. In situations such as a honeymoon or music festival, the chance to grab a photo that fits into the common portrayal of a similar event is the ultimate goal. We base our activities and actions on what we believe our imaginary audience wants to see, serving an online community that returns nothing but affirmation of the artificial, and in result we remove ourselves from genuine experiences that could be used to serve our selves and those around us.

While I’d love to blame Instagram for this photo-driven life, Instagram is not to blame. People have allowed the content that we consume to be idolized, expected, and a requirement to belong in a digital society. The imaginary audience is our primary focus, rather than our real-life audience. A platform as incredible as Instagram should be used as an outlet to dispense our authentic life moments, opposed to a platform that causes our life to be driven by creating inauthentic moments. 

One year later without Instagram, I decided to re-add it with these intentions in mind. I now keep a very small, private profile that captures my authentic life experiences and serves to share those moments with the people I love. So, the next time you’re pulling your phone out to snap a picture, ask yourself if this is a moment authentic to you and if it’s worth taking your eyes off of the world around you. Remove the photograph from the stereotype of being used as a tool for identity formation and affirmation and return it to its simplest, reduced form of simply capturing a genuine moment.



## Resources

Baker, M. (n.d.). Containing Multitudes. Retrieved from https://alwaysreadthemanual.com/read/issues/5/mills-baker/article.html.

Marwick, A. E., & Boyd, D. (2010, July 7). I tweet honestly, I tweet passionately: Twitter users, context collapse, and the imagined audience - Alice E. Marwick, danah boyd, 2011. Retrieved from https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/1461444810365313.


