---
title: From books to phones&#58; The digital self and the lost of attention span
lname: Luu
fname: Jason
email: luuj5@mcmaster.ca
web:
image-description: An open book with glasses on top with a smartphone beside it on a table. 
bio: Jason Luu is a student at McMaster University in the multimedia program. When he is not working on assignments, he is on his phone or laptop playing video games to pass the time or to escape the thought of an upcoming project to finish.
---
Through technological advances, we have gone from needing to go to the bookstore or library to obtain books, to be able to read any book in virtually any location on a smartphone or computer. The way books can capture a reader and make them visualize the world within is what makes them interesting to read as it is a form of escapism but because of the rise of smartphones and social media, that experience has been fading due to the constant need to be informed about current events. People including me have difficulties attempting to read proper novels without wanting to check their smartphones to scroll through social media apps to see what is new. Josephine Tovey's article about her story of struggling to read a book without being distracted is relevant today in a digital age (Tovey, 2019). With the inclusion of the digital self wanting to express what we are to the internet and attention span decreases contributing to the difficulties of reading a book shows how vulnerable we are to the convenience of technology.

The digital self is a sort of profile we put out into the internet. It can come in various forms such as accounts on social media apps such as Facebook and Twitter, accounts on online forums and trackers like any health app. Focusing on social media, it is both a blessing and a curse because while it can help us stay up to date with friends, family, or the news, we tend to get too absorbed and can distract us from important tasks such as finishing projects or doing chores around the house. Speaking from experience, the main social media accounts I use on my phone the most in order are Facebook, Twitter, and Reddit. I use Facebook and Twitter as a way to see what pages and people I follow have posted and see what they have to say. I use Reddit to be informed about any of the video games I play whether it is amusing memes, patch notes or interesting videos. I also am not so much of a poster myself because I have grown out from the need to search for likes and shares but that is also a valid way to use social media. Some people are obsessed with wanting more attention for their posts and are willing to put their safety on the line for an arbitrary amount of digital thumbs up from complete strangers. How this talk about social media equates to the struggle of reading a book is that a book is a substantial time investment and a single page can have an equivalent of a 'wall of text' someone may post as a comment on Reddit. We have gotten so used to reading comments on social media posts since it is only a few words a time that it is much harder to read something that is longer though we may read enough comments that will total multiple pages worth of text. 

Tovey says that it is not the fact that we are not reading any less, but it is the trance that we get from reading a book is the more difficult part (2019). This can not be any truer because back in middle school before I got my phone, I would be able to get invested in reading a book easily. My favourite novels were part of the _Maximum Ride_ series which involved a group of teens with wings (Shmoop Editorial Team, 2008). Though when I found out that it had a graphic novel I think that was the time where my attention span started to decrease and it became difficult to read regular novels since the combination of visuals and a more bearable amount of text gave me a more enjoyable experience and saves me the time of trying to imagine what the characters look like. Then I found out about manga (Japanese comics) and I pretty much have abandoned reading novels (Ashley, 2015). Fast forward to today where I scroll through endless amounts of social media and reading manga online without much difficulty but have trouble reading a textbook to study for a test without checking my phone every few minutes shows how my attention span has deteriorated due to technology. Even if I were to study with a digital textbook that can save space since I can just access it from my laptop, the temptation of opening a new tab to facebook is only a few clicks away. The addiction to connect with my digital self makes it that staying away from it even for a moment makes me want to go back to it as soon as possible since I may have missed some important news while studying. Reading a book is a hassle now compared to when I was a child since I would have to force myself to get comfortable like how Tovey needs the right conditions in order to focus on reading a book (Tovey, 2019). While I would like to focus on reading a book I particularly liked, having my phone beside me may not be the best location for it.

Tovey's article provides some of her personal experiences about reading books and it has relevancy in an era of smartphones and laptops (2019). With the digital self, the inclusion of many profiles we make on the internet through social media sites such as Facebook and Twitter encourages us to connect with other people to share our experiences. But there will always be some people that only care about the number of likes and comments they get on their posts and are willing to put themselves in danger for it. While social media is a nice form of entertainment to have, it distracts us from the simple experience of reading a book since we want to check our phones to keep up to date with the latest news and other updates. This disrupts the trance you go into when reading an interesting book and it only will get harder to enter this trance as more interesting activities appear. This can also cause your attention span to decrease because of the vast amount of text you have to read at once for books which is difficult when someone had experienced reading in the form of comments on social media posts for quite some time. For me, if I had to check my phone five minutes after I started reading a book, the book was probably not interesting in the first place. Now if you can excuse me, I need to go back to chatting with my digital friends via my digital self.

## References
Ashley, K. (2015, May 8). An Introduction to Manga. Retrieved October 7, 2019, from https://geekandsundry.com/an-introduction-to-manga/.
Shmoop Editorial Team. (2008, November 11). Maximum Ride: The Angel Experiment. Retrieved October 7, 2019, from https://www.shmoop.com/maximum-ride/
Tovey, J. (2019, October 2). Before the internet broke my attention span I read books compulsively. Now, it takes willpower | Josephine Tovey. Retrieved October 6, 2019, from https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2019/oct/03/before-the-internet-broke-my-attention-span-i-read-books-compulsively-now-it-takes-willpower.