---
lname: Mitchell
fname: Kayla
email: mitchelk@mcmaster.ca
bio: >-
  Kayla Mitchell is a fourth year McMaster student studying Communications
  Studies. Kayla is also completing her Marketing Diploma with McMaster
  Continuing Education Program. Kayla resides in Mississauga, Ontario and works
  at a local coffee shop, Starbucks. Kayla's love for social media provided her the opportunity to run
  a Starbucks instagram page. While working as a Barista, her love for coffee
  and media has played a huge role in the the development of her undergraduate
  career.
image-description: iPhone eating applications
title: Apple Cracks down on Apps that fight iPhone addiction
---

In 2019 it was made prominent to Wall Street investors that individuals are
becoming more reliant on their smartphone devices. The Wall Street investors
persistently wrote letters to the head of Apple, explaining that they need to
address the fact that individuals were becoming addicted to their specific IOS
devices. This urged Apple too create a tool (Screen Time) that would limit phone
use and other unimportant applications that are prevalent on all Apple devices.
It is “found in the settings apps alongside notifications and do not disturb,
the feature monitors the way you use your device, telling you everything from
how long you’ve spent on certain categories to specific apps, it will even tell
you how many times you pick up your phone within a given hour”(Miles, 2019).

The service that was provided through apple allows you to set limits on all
applications that are on your IOS device as well as provide content and privacy
restrictions for minors so that it can ensure downtime from their device as well
as protect them from unwarranted sites and applications. We live in a generation
that solely relies on our phones and laptops in order to receive some sort of
fulfillment. Apple noticed the amount of time that one spends on their device.
There is full awareness to why apple decided to add this feature to their
devices. It provides an overview on the amount of time spent on their devices
and also allows people to take a step back and reflect on how much time they
truly spend on their phone. Since individuals were complaining to Apple and were
persistently writing them letters, they could have used crowdsourcing.
Crowdsourcing is used to obtain information from a large group of people to see
if an application like Screen time was needed so that users can track their
phone usage. I believe that crowdsourcing is a cost-efficient method that
engages the publics opinion on what is needed and allows a big company like
Apple to reach a wider audience.

The New York Times article stated that when Apple decided to add this feature to
all IOS devices, they decided to remove prior applications from the App Store
that provided similar features that the new IOS screen time provided. I believe
Apple removed all prior competition to ensure that they did not have to compete
for features that were already on all Apple devices. This caused many app
developers to express dissatisfaction because they decided to “remove and or
restrict at least 11 of the 17 most downloaded screen time and parental control
apps according to an analysis by the New York Times and Sensor Tower, an app
data firm” (Nicas, 2019).

Apple removing these applications or restricting the content that is provided
through their store caused a lot of people to lash out and complain to Apple
stating; it is not fair that since they created an application, they had the
ability to remove all their competitors. In my opinion, the former applications
provided more for consumers than Apple does through their Screen Time
application.

Parents were the majority of the people to complain because deleting the
applications from their children’s devices enabled children to unrestricted
access on social media and enabled them to become more reliant on these devices.
It made them more reliant because the parents were not able to put any time
limits on their use of social media, causing the children to use them more than
allowed. This proved that Apple is doing everything they can to make more money.
By removing all these applications from the App Store, it has stopped the
revenue from their competitors and has given consumers no other option but to
use the feature that is shown through Apple devices.

The prior apps focused more on the needs of parents. They were used to protect
children from apps that could be used to violate their privacy and security,
while giving these children the options to browse and look through whatever they
want without the permission from parents, it was seen as safe since they had no
access to inappropriate information. The prior apps gave parents’ permission to
look through their children’s devices from their own phones and were able to
keep track of what they were using their phones for. Those prior applications
also allowed for parents to set limits from their own devices on to their
children devices to ensure family quality time away from all electronic devices.
If this was to happen in the late 1900’s there would not be a worry about
children’s safety. Today, we live in a generation were 3-year old’s have iPad’s
and there is a lot more access to inappropriate content online. The App Store’s
competitors were able to provide a sense of relief for parents, that Apple never
thought to provide and still do not provide for parents.

There is a much better solution that Apple could have done, so that these
companies do not feel like they are being targeted because their apps could hurt
Apples business. They should have not abused their dominant position to lift
itself and bury its rivals. I understand what Apple is trying to convey to these
companies. Realistically they don’t owe them any explanations. What these
companies need to understand is that the App Store is owned by Apple and if they
find a need/reason to delete an app, they have every right to do so. Apple has a
lot of unusual power over the apps that they keep on their platform. But I do
believe that they should have provided better evidence to why they are removing
the applications instead of saying “We treat all apps the same, including those
that compete with our own services, said Ms. Levine, the Apple spokeswoman”
(Nicas, 2019). Our iPhones should be used as resources and should be provided
with the tools that other developers are able to offer. Parents should not have
to subject to buying other devices because of privacy and restrictions that
Apple does not want to provide for their consumers. “Apple’s tools have another
shortcoming, it requires the whole family to own iPhones. The many apps that
were removed from Apple allowed parents with iPhones to control their children’s
android devices” (Nicas, 2019).

With the multiple companies that are offering amazing privacy and restriction
services to ensure their children do not browse inappropriate content, I believe
they should have the right to be displayed on the Apple Store. There have been
many app developers that have provided apps for the App Store for more than 10
years that can provide services for all IOS devices and Android devices while
still following all the guidelines that are to be followed through the App
Store. I do believe that the prior apps deserved at least some recognition for
the services that they were able to provide and be able to inform them about
what they can change throughout their app in order to still be available on
these devices.  

## References


Miles, S. (2019, September 2). What is Apple Screen Time and how does it work? -
Pocket-lint. Retrieved from
https://www.pocket-lint.com/apps/news/apple/144733-what-is-apple-screen-time-and-how-does-it-work.

Nicas, J. (2019, April 27). Apple Cracks Down on Apps That Fight iPhone
Addiction. Retrieved from
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/27/technology/apple-screen-time-trackers.html?searchResultPosition=19.

Image

Muchmore, M. (2019, July 12). The 100 Best iPhone Apps for 2019. Retrieved from
https://www.pcmag.com/article/286654/the-100-best-iphone-apps-for-2019.
