---
title: The Rise of Twitter and Fake News
lname: Olesinski 
fname: Kaitlyn
email: olesinsk@mcmaster.ca
web: https://www.instagram.com/kaitlyn_olesinski/
image-discription: The picture shows the Tweet Keith Urban tweet about Osama Bib Ladens dealth. 
bio: Kaitlyn Olesinski is an creative and innotvated student living in Hamilton, Ontario, Canada, that is currently enrolled at McMster University. Kaitlyn is an undergraduate of Bachlor of arts in communication studies. Kaitlyn has studied many new forms of media while also getting a chance to work at a multi-media company called Havas Canada. Kaitlyn has many passions recarding social media, art, communication and technology.
---

In May of 2011, Keith Urban delivered the news of Osama Bin Laden’s death on Twitter (Moon & Hadley, 2014). With just one click of a button, millions of people on Twitter learned of his death even before President Obama conducted his official press conference. Shortly after Keith Urban tweeted the news, millions of his followers retweeted his tweet, resulting in a viral spread across Twitter. The Internet today, has allowed millions of people to publish content through social media, blogs and website. Along with my other social media platforms, Twitter is one of the most successful and prominent forms for news media (Tandoc, Lim & Ling, 2018). In this case, Twitter is a micro-blogging application that allows audiences to share information simultaneously. Twitter allows users to post stories and follow up to the minute on news and events.  With simple technological features and designs, Twitter users can “retweet”, “hashtag" and “favourite” news and stories. Twitter provides a convenient and very popular vehicle of communication to spread information and news to large audiences. For example, every year Bell Canada donates five cents per tweet towards mental health. Today, Bell Let’s Talk, funding stands at $100, 695,763.75. Not only did Twitter provide a platform for Bell to raise money but it also provided a strong platform to educate and raise awareness about mental health issues. Twitter just does not provide a one-way communication structure; people can post comments, share additional information and retweet the story to their other social media accounts around the world. It is interesting to see how Twitter’s initial communication is transformed from one voice to become the voice of the masses. This example reinforces the ease of how Twitter can spread news and awareness through mass audiences and Twitter’s influential impact of sharing such information within minutes to world audiences. Twitter has become one of the first sites where people go to share and consume their news (Hermida, 2010). Citizen journalism now plays an enormous role through twitter. Twitter allows individuals to post short fragments of information, stories and news from an expansive range of official and unofficial sources. However, the issue of misinterpreted and misleading information being posted on Twitter has led to many forms of abuse in today’s society. While many agree that Twitter is a valuable news sources, many may also argue that it has allowed the rise of the term “fake news” to be developed.  

Over the years, it is very apparent the impact electronic and social media has had on journalism. Our society demands instant and constant news updates, so audiences are increasingly learning towards Twitter as their official news source rather than traditional newspaper or news broadcasting radio and television sites. The pressure to be the first to get the story out, places great pressure on news agencies verification and due diligence process.  Legal repercussions also do not seem to be frequent for those news sources that may quote improper sources. The penalty may be avoided with a retraction, but the damage has already been done. The cost for instant new is also the potential for society to be manipulated with information (fake news). Fake news is any form of news, stories or information that is created to deliberately misinform readers about a topic (Tandoc, Lim & Ling, 2018). In this case, Twitter has received a significant amount of negative attention towards facilitating and allowing biased informational news stories. Stories which could influence various political campaigns and push specific political agendas. The influence of the tweeter is very powerful which is highlighted from the attention the tweets get which originate from celebrities, politicians to US presidents.  The general public may make the incorrect assumption that since this person is an influential person, a person of power, a person of authority, that the information being presented in a tweet, is indeed correct. Twitter allows thousands of people to freely tweet information and stories without citing official sources. The rise of citizen journalism, along with unofficial news sources and algorithms has caused Twitter to be now responsible for providing a platform for misinforming and manipulating the readers with messages filled with misleading and inaccurate information. Fake news and misleading information are of primary concern in our society.  Education is power and by controlling how we are “educating” society through the daily news and interpretation of world events, can have severe repercussions.  Twitter does try to verify news accounts, but it is still easy for users to manipulate the information.  Once the “fake news” has been tweeted out, it is very difficult to retract and correct the information.  A recent study used the Twitter search function NodeXL to provide access to social media data networks. Using the term “fake news” that study found over 8, 1295 results on March 9, 2017. The data extracted from this study showed that during the day of March 9th, 2017, Twitter publicized more than 8,000 tweets that were considered to be fake news (Brummette, DiStaso, Vafeiadis, Messner, 2018). Twitter and the issue of fake news does not only involve changing various word or fabricating the texts of information; it can also involve the photoshop of pictures. While many users of Twitter get their news from reading a tweet, fake news has also been linked with the manipulation of photos. With the various applications of photoshop, it is very easy for users to alter the photo to catch the audience’s eye. More specifically, how images are manipulated and recreated to deliberately cause different interpretations from the original picture. For example, a Twitter account posted a picture of what looked like to be a tree burning during the Notre-Dame de Paris fire. However, another photo was taken showing a different perspective of that same photo. In this case, the original photo was simply a couple of sticks on fire, but just angled a different way to make it look much worse than it originally was. 

Twitters’ involvement with fake news and manipulating mass media is reinforced by the article Defining “Fake News” by Edson C. Tandoc Jr, Zheng Wei Lim and Richard Ling. This article discusses the implications and the issues of relying on Twitter and other social media platforms as an accurate and a reliable source of information. The article argues that Twitter provides a space for non-journalists to reach out to mass audiences which leads to the high risk of inaccurately informing readers with false information. In relation to the course readings, I was able to connect this article with the reading called, The Revolution Will be Tweeted” by Blake Hounshell. In short, this article outlines how Twitter is always “buzzing with news, ideas, rumours, speculation and juicy gossip” (Hounshell, 2011). The article introduces a brief summary about how much attention Twitter reached after Egypts embattled leader, Hosni Mubarak announced that he will not be stepping down. In this case, even though news and stories are constantly being Tweeted and retweeted by users, this article argues that Twitter “isn’t the maker of political revolution, but the vanguard of a media one.” After reading the article, it asks whether social media is a reliable source of information and news. In this case, I applied my personal opinion of how social media such as Twitter, raises the opportunity for fake news. Moreover, I believe that we are living in a world that is largely created through the lens of social media. People are constantly Tweeting and reposting news stories and information at an incredibly fast pace. Today, I find it nearly impossible to know what is true and what is false. With the rise of citizen journalism; via Twitter, people are freely able to share their opinions, beliefs and news which puts citizens at risk of being misinformed on current news events and stories. I feel that there are not enough adequate checks and balances to control social media. Social media progressed so much faster than the laws and regulations surrounding it. People should be held accountable for misinformation and deliberate manipulation of media but yet, I rarely see any legal consequences directed towards social media. The legal charges that have been made, definitely do not correspond to the number of blatant abuses that have taken place. 

In conclusion, after reading one of the courses article, The Revolution Will be Tweeted, I applied by concern of fake news and citizen journalism to an article called Defining “Fake News”. I believed this essays portrays how Twitter and other social media platform raises the issue of fake news. Social media is teaching me to question the written word which seems to go against my instincts. I have realized that I must be constantly questioning to determine what is accurate. I have to test the information with my various sources. It seems social media has now placed the role of journalism with me.  


## Resources: 

Tandoc Jr, E. C., Lim, Z. W., & Ling, R. (2018). Defining “fake news” A typology of scholarly definitions. Digital journalism, 6(2), 137-153.

Hermida, A. (2010). Twittering the news: The emergence of ambient journalism. Journalism practice, 4(3), 297-308.

Brummette, J., DiStaso, M., Vafeiadis, M., & Messner, M.(2018). Read all about it: The 	politicization of “fake news” on Twitter. Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly, 95(2), 497-517.  

Hounshell, B. (2011). The revolution will be tweeted. Foreign policy, (187), 20.

Moon, S. J., & Hadley, P. (2014). Routinizing a new technology in the newsroom: Twitter as a news source in mainstream media. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 58(2), 289-305.