---
title: Why YouTube's Closed 'Craptions' Need Improvement
lname: Pacheco
fname: Kristen
email: pachecok@mcmaster.ca
web: https://www.wired.com/story/problem-with-youtubes-terrible-closed-craptions/
image-description: closed caption on computer cartoon by Sam Whitney
bio: Editorial regarding the improvement of YouTube closed caption
---
#  Why YouTube's Closed 'Craptions’ Needs Improvement

Consumer made content through social media has become normalized in today's society. YouTube is one of the most popular consumer made content platforms. It has content for absolutely everyone. Personally, I use YouTube frequently as a pass time, as entertainment, as a study tool, and so much more. One thing that is often taken advantage of, when it comes to video’s, is accessibility. One of the major steps towards user accessibility YouTube has established is easy to use closed comments. The only downside with this is, the subtitle accuracy is absolutely terrible.
 
YouTube has been reported as having some of the least accurate voice to text subtitle options out of all social media. The closed caption option on videos aren’t specifically used just by individuals with disabilities. I personally just like reading subtitles while listening to something to make sure I am hearing things correctly and understand the content. It can also be used as a form of translation if something is in a different language or other situations in regards to language dialects and accents. This concept of subtitles being more universally used by all of society is touched upon in an article called  _“The Problem With YouTube's Terrible Closed 'Craptions'”_  written by Emma Grey Ellis. It states that “caption experts are quick to point out that even those with perfect hearing can benefit from using captions. They assist English language learners, of course, but also native speakers struggling to understand, say, a thick Scottish brogue. And when you’re scrolling through your feed with the sound off, they’re a necessity” (Ellis, E. G. 2019). 

Captions are a very relevant part of digital society today. They are an art form that requires “the distillation of an entire landscape of sound—music, speech, background noise—into tweet-sized, speed-readable lines” (Ellis, E. G. 2019). An example that comes from Emma Grey Ellis’ article was that when watching a makeup tutorial on youtube, the word ‘concealer’ was translated in a subtitle to the word ‘zebra’. YouTubes closed captions specifically are so ridiculously inaccurate that it has become humorous and therefore almost impossible to use. They have become more of a distraction than an asset. Personally, I have subtitles set up for Netflix and Facebook and they are both pretty accurate but I refuse to use them for YouTube because it becomes frustrating trying to decipher what is accurate and what isn’t. 

The most obvious reason for why YouTube needs to take action and fix their closed caption settings is due to accessibility for all. YouTube specifically has been the target of many online campaigns due to the fact that the captions are terrible. “Appreciative of the effort but unconvinced by the results, activists have dubbed them “craptions”(Ellis, E. G. 2019). This article focuses a lot on information collected by Rikki Poynter, who runs a “No More CRAPtions” social media campaign dedicated to fixing YouTubes closed caption settings. YouTube gives creators the option to insert their own subtitles but normally it is left to be generated by YouTube and who then turns what should be understandable captions into craptions. The term “‘Craptions’ isn’t a new term by any means,” Poynter says. “The deaf community has been coming together on this for a long time now—though it seems I’ve had the most success, and I’m the one still constantly pushing on it”(Ellis, E. G. 2019). Accessibility should be a priority for companies, especially ones who rely on viewer numbers and likes. Everyone should be able to have equal access to online content, it is easily adaptable to accommodate everyone.

The article included some interesting information that I did not know in regards to YouTube specific closed captioning. YouTube has recently developed a new ‘trolling’ culture. This means that individuals go out of their way to upset viewers online to provoke an emotional response. The abuse of audience editing caption options have become a really big issue. People have started “making captions deliberately misleading and offensive as an edgy joke”(Ellis, E. G. 2019). Never once has the thought of changing a subtitle to something rude or offensive ever crossed my mind. YouTube should be monitoring their caption changes done by audiences and verifying them to ensure quality. It is not fair for someone who require subtitles to understand content be blindsided and instead receive offensive commentary just because someone else thought it would be funny. The issue with YouTube caption can be resolved so easily. YouTube should be updating their algorithm to catch inaccurate translations or offensive content in the same way they would in a normal video content. Technology has advanced so much that there is no excuse for something as simple as closed caption to be ignored and overall just be terrible.

Due to the rise of social media and digital technology, everyone wants to be on the same playing field. By YouTube not prioritizing their closed caption accuracy, it distances users from the rest of the digital community. They have a harder time connecting and communicating with other individuals within the public sphere. By individuals feeling disconnected and not feeling like they can participate with the public sphere, they lack confidence and it can impact someone's digital self. Our digital self is typically regarding how we represent ourselves online but it also can be related to content we consumers and how we interact with that content. Our ability to access and understand digital content is a huge part of our digital self in society. Digital equality and understanding of the digital culture is a main reason that I am interested in digital studies. The terrible captions on YouTube has the ability to make individuals feel as though they cannot participate in this specific digital community.

Overall, YouTube is hands down the worst quality when it comes to accuracy of closed captioned. I have noticed it in the past, and it is almost ridiculous being able to hear what is really being said while reading what YouTube is claiming is being said. “Not every creator prioritizes captions if they haven’t encountered accessibility in their own lives” (Ellis, E. G. 2019). This statement is very strong. The fact that a lot of people who are completely able bodied,  look at horrifically inaccurate subtitles and just think it is funny without doing anything about it just proves that society needs to change and adapt. For able bodied individuals to take advantage of what we have access to without making it accessible to all is saddening. Closed caption is no longer just for individuals who are disiabled. Society is slowly shifting towards everyone using closed captions including myself. Our society needs to adapt and move forward to create user friendly content for everyone. Why not start now?

# Work Cited
Ellis, E. G. (2019, October 1). _The Problem With YouTube's Terrible Closed 'Craptions'_. Retrieved October 2, 2019, from https://www.wired.com/story/problem-with-youtubes-terrible-closed-craptions/.





