--- 
title: breathe a little
lname: Pathirana
fname: Shasni
email: pathiras@mcmaster.ca
image-description: Collage of woman looking in mirrors - Photos by Shasni Pathirana
bio: Shasni Pathirana is a third-year student majoring in honours multimedia and minoring in peace studies at McMaster University. She was born in Sri Lanka and has two younger siblings, she came to Canada with her family when she was just three years old. In her spare time, she enjoys going on hikes with her friends, photography and good food.
---

## What is happiness?

Happiness can come in various forms, but there is yet to be an exact definition of what happiness means. It can be the spark of something bright, pure and content, which is hard to find in today's society. The exact definition of happiness is hard to come by since I am unsure how to define it in my own words. Theoretically, social media and the idea of happiness would go hand in hand that having this online persona will bring us happiness. However, I find this not to be true. 

I think the textbook definition of happiness is overrated since it can mean various things to many different people. To put a definition on a feeling is quite tricky since people tend to attach different memories or aspects of life to it. It also has to deal with the fact that our perception of feelings develops and changes drastically. Personally, I think that my ideas and definition of happiness have developed as I've grown older, and this has largely impacted them. I don't think I fully understand it yet because at times I find I am at a loss of happiness; I don't feel happy at all. I feel lost, confused and all alone, and this puts a strain on me. As social media has started to take over the world, there has been a seemingly increase in how early children begin to use it. children begin to use it.

## What is instant gratification:

As social media has developed, the concept of instant gratification has come into play as well. This leads us to believe that it is what we need to be happy, but neither social media or this concept of instant gratification can give us this happiness. Nowadays, life is very fast-paced, and a lot of people live 'on the go.' They don't necessarily have that time for self-reflection or time to indulge in their emotions and thoughts because they are constantly preoccupied with other things to do. With the emergence of online communication, we also see that there's a loss of emotion in communication online, as well. With online communication, you have the time to sift through things to say that could hide your real intent rather than dealing with something face to face where someone can actually pick up cues to your voice, tone, body language. I know I have a hard time trying to figure out people's real intent and what they mean, especially online. More often than not, I seek help from friends to help me clarify what is truly being said because I find it difficult to express what I want to say. I know people like having the time to get the chance to create that witty or creative response to showcase their personality online and I am like this as well. But is this who we really are in person or is it just someone we are trying to portray ourselves as? 

Through the concept of 'instant gratification,' there is this connection to another concept, that by showing an online persona, "we have it all,"; we will be happy. When looked at a birds-eye view of both these concepts, it becomes a sad ideology that people in society continue to live by. In society, consumerism leads us to believe that buying things will make us happy and give us a sense of self-worth or belonging (to a community, clique, culture, etc.). Again, we see that our self-image should not be deemed on what we own, wear, or who we associate ourselves with. Yes, buying creates a sense of happiness; some call it 'retail therapy,' but at the end of the day, those materialistic things don't amount to the things that truly matter. What matters more than this is the people that we share our lives with, and the little things in life. These 'little things' in life vary from person to person, but at the end of it all, it can create a true sense of happiness. 

## Creating human connections:

Human interaction is being replaced with these virtual communities, and thus, connections with each other are changing. The idea that people are trying to find ways to re-examine this sense of happiness because they have begun to get worried about what is happening in society. I see this consistently happening to the younger generation of children, where more and more children rely on the use of these types of technology to make connections with their friends. People have begun to use sites like Twitter, Facebook, Snapchat and Instagram, which are some of the most popular social media sites, while popular online dating sites such as Tinder and Bumble follow closely behind. This aspect of using social media as a guide to being happy does apply to my daily life as well. On the days I'm not exactly feeling like my happy self, I use social media constantly. Although it does give me this fleeting feeling of 'happiness', lately I have been feeling overwhelmed and upset. Again, I use social media as an outlet for me to try and make myself feel good, despite this feeling of being upset. This is something that I imagine many other people my age reside with as well, and thus starts a vicious cycle of social media usage to make us happy. I wish I used different methods to make me happier, besides using social media. The use of social media, like consumerism, gives a fleeting feeling of happiness that goes away within seconds, but to find something that makes us truly happy doesn't necessarily reside with materialistic things. At times I tell myself maybe I should delete every single app and see how my life will change, but then something happens where I stop and think no that can't happen. And this is proven in various studies to showcase how social media has been a contributing factor in unhappy and stressful students (Vannucci 2017). Finding happiness is uplifting, but it could also be masking other emotions that you feel, including sadness, anger, frustration and even disappointment. I know for me happiness is being with the people I love, going on random adventures and laughing till we can't laugh any longer.

In conclusion, social media does have the power of bringing people together and connecting people from all parts of the world. At the end of the day, real-world connections are what make you happy, but it all depends on what type of person you are. Happiness doesn't necessarily have to be a constant feeling, you don't need to be happy ALL THE TIME. But cultivating the idea that there are different ways to be happy either than materialistic things is the tricky part. Happiness isn't something that SHOULD be constant because, in that case, you're just lying to yourself because there are so many more emotions in life, and they don't necessarily have to be negative either. It's the idea that there's all these little things, cues, instances to make you happy, but it is your own choice to pick those out, and you have control over your feelings and reactions. Allowing yourself to be happy and see little instances where there is the sun shining no matter how dark your day its important to understand. Sometimes we just need to breathe a little bit slower; inhale some sunshine and exhale a bit of happiness. Sometimes people just need to breathe.

## Citations:

Holson, L. M. (2019, September 28). Are We Living in a Post-Happiness World? Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2019/09/28/sunday-review/joy-happiness-life.html?searchResultPosition=16.

Vannucci, A., Flannery, K. M., & Ohannessian, C. M. (2017). Social media use and anxiety in emerging adults. Journal of Affective Disorders, 207, 163–166. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2016.08.040