---
title: Twitch The Mechanical Turk
lname: Reynolds
fname: Jonah
email: reynoj6@mcmaster.ca
web: www.twitch.tv/officiallooter
image-description:
bio: Born and raised in Japan with a love for media and content creation. I moved to North America when I was 16 where I attended high school in the U.S. My dad was a Mac alum which is what brought me to McMaster in pursuit of a multimedia degree, where my passion for content creation can be fulfilled.
---

There is this false reality in place that people are able to stream on Twitch, a
gaming streaming platform that allows people to broadcast their game play over
the internet to an audience that would be interested in the content. Twitch is
both addictive and deceptive, by portraying that people with the right skill set
and personality can get rich by playing video games and streaming on their
platform. When in reality Twitch or in the wider spectrum Amazon who owns
Twitch, are merely making people think this so that their ads are played across
millions of unique daily visitors that are watching people stream on Twitch. The
Amazon owned company have this system in place, where millions are baited into
thinking they can grow on the twitch platform because of the small handful of
people that are glamorized millionaire internet celebrities that made their
wealth off of Twitch. Amazons mechanical Turk spreads much wider than one may
imagine when taking into account the companies that are corrupted by a system
that feeds the giant that is Amazon.

 

Twitch currently operates on an approximate 50/50 split for the majority of
their streamers. That means for every \$4.99 subscription, an affiliate creator
receives approximately \$2.50. Twitch portrays a path to partner program which
is a step by step set of achievements one needs to reach in order to get the
full \$4.99 of subscriber money + ad revenue. In order to reach this goal, one
must stream 25 hours in the last 30 days, stream on 12 different days of the
last 30 and the hardest part have an average of 75 viewers for the past 30 days
(the top 0.01% of streamers on the platform reach this goal). Thus, for the
large overwhelming majority of the streamers striving to reach this goal it is
merely impossible as all the benefits and exposure go towards promoting the
partnered streamers while the smaller streamers are the ones’s getting milked of
both ad revenue and subscriber money. To put this into perspective, a streamer
of 3000 followers with 30 subs per month with average viewer ship of 20-30
viewers will gain about \$75 dollars a month + anywhere between \$50-\$200 in
donations which is completely random depending on the month. However for the
same amount of work in terms of hours streamed from a bigger streamer such as
Tyler ‘Ninja’ Blevins is monumentally different. “Ninja is the biggest gaming
streamer in the world – he made a reported \$10m (£8.2m) last year from
streaming himself near wordlessly playing one of the world’s biggest e-sports”
(Golby, Guardian).

 

Someone of Ninja’s status who had 40,000 people subscribed to his channel before
his mysterious move over to Microsofts streaming platform ‘Mixer’ would result
into a \$200,000 monthly income merely off subscribers alone. To compare that
number to the earlier 30 subscriber channel that is considered in the top 1% of
size would only make around \$75 a month. Not to mention the ad revenue and
donation count and partnerships he has, which would estimate towards half a
million dollars per month on top of the already \$200,000. This is an extreme
example of course and most twitch partners are not making the amount Blevins is,
however the system is their in place to glorify the small percentage that keeps
the streaming service alive by portraying a dream like job to the mass majority
that are being paid next to nothing for their services of spreading ad’s for
Amazon. Making an substantial profit off those who are working towards this
seemingly impossible goal.

 

There is something addictive, something alluring about streamers. As Joel Golby
put it in his Article published in the Guardian. There is a “soothing hypnotism
of watching mostly silently men down energy drinks and kill other players,
bathed in the blue light of their computer screens” (Golby, Guardian). The
therapeutic experience of never being entirely alone when a platform like twitch
exists, being able to interact with someone at all times to fulfill that sense
of loneliness in our modern digital age. “You can talk to the TV, now, and the
TV can talk back. You can ask the TV if it can throw a grenade out of a
helicopter” (Golby, Guardian). With the world brought so close together via the
internet, this is the closest the world has ever been connected. Yet, people are
so shielded and human physical interactions are growing ever so uncommon.
Nothing about twitch makes particular sense in our physical world, yet makes all
the sense in our online world. “If you pitched the idea of it to TV giants in
2011, you’d be laughed out of the room” (Golby, Guardian). As mentioned earlier,
in our digital age the physical sensation of being in the presence of another
human-being is less common and almost too intimate for that of today’s
generation. But you replace that interaction with that of a computer screen,
then all of sudden “It’s possible to talk about sharp feelings and hard emotions
better when the person you’re talking to isn’t making eye contact” (Golby,
Guardian). Personally even I am also guilty of this, for it is how I and many
others of my age were raised in this day of age. I remember my first crush I
ever asked out was over a simple text. But now reflecting on this it takes away
that sense of realism and human nature to replace this seemingly nerve wracking
and difficult experience by suppressing it with technology. When ideas like this
are reflected upon and formulated, one must venture carefully in the realm of
online streaming, for it can be mentally taxing for both streamers and viewers
in their own respective ways.

 

We know that engagement with video games releases a chemical called dopamine.
This releases a pleasure sensation in the brain usually associated with food,
money and sex. Disease; when referring to cases affiliated with dopamine, it is
most commonly associated with drugs, alcohol,gambling and even getting a text.
It’s no secret that excessive gaming can hinder your ability to interact with
people in a physical setting. So for many of these gamers that are viewing these
Twitch streamers “leaving the house seems too much” but when put into “an idle
chatter zone where someone is always there to listen” life gets a lot easier
just sitting at your desk while feeling connected to the world (Golby,
Guardian).

 

 

Resources
---------

Golby, J. (2019, September 8). Trigger happy: the amazing rise of Twitch.
Retrieved from
https://www.theguardian.com/global/2019/sep/08/how-did-twitch-become-as-big-as-youtube-by-live-streaming-video-game-players.

 

Semuels, A. (2018, January 23). The Internet Is Enabling a New Kind of Poorly
Paid Hell. Retrieved from
https://www.theatlantic.com/business/archive/2018/01/amazon-mechanical-turk/551192/.

 

 
-
