---
title: "Gillette's #MeToo Ad Gives a Worthy Take on Masculinity in 2019"
lname: Sasikumar
fname: Abby
email: sasikuma@mcmaster.ca 
web: abbysasi.wordpress.com							
image-description: #MeToo_ Movement 
bio: Abby Sasikumar is a third year Communication Studies and Multimedia student at McMaster University and is an editor for the course MMEDIA 3B03&#58; In Response to &ldquo;The Meme Factory&rdquo; by Jia Tolentino Digital Cultures. When Abby isn't writing editorials on hot topics in society, she is often seen recording her podcast &ldquo;Abby Hour&rdquo; or creating content online. In her free time, she also enjoys painting, screen-writing, and editing videos.  Her specific interests include&#58; In Response to &ldquo;The Meme Factory&rdquo; by Jia Tolentino pop-culture, film, visual art, beauty and fashion. 
---

This editorial will be focused on the Guardian article “Gillette #MeToo razors ad on 'toxic masculinity' gets praise – and abuse” by Alexandra Topping, Kate Lyons and Matthew Weaver. Gillette, a shaving company, has been receiving both abuse and praise after releasing their advertisement entitled “The Best Men Can Be” promoting positive masculinity. The campaign engages with the #MeToo movement and exposes images of sexism, violence, sexual harassment and toxic masculinity.

The Gillette advertisement, which has over 100,000 dislikes on the Guardian News YouTube channel, explicitly illustrates the backlash the campaign has received numerically with many of those not in favour of the campaign’s message and delivery. The commercial received heavy criticism and threats for promoting left-wing propaganda, virtue signalling and misandry. The commercial depicts men in different scenarios behaving poorly and participating in inappropriate behaviour such as bullying a boy, and sexual harassing a woman. For instance, a part of the campaign illustrates a man preventing another man from cat-calling a woman on the street. Various other examples of men teaching other men how to treat others with respect are sprinkled throughout the advertisement, encouraging them to be better. 

However, I agree with Bernice King who states that “the commercial is not anti-male, it’s pro-humanity” (Topping et al., 2019). I do not believe that Gillette is attempting to paint all men as evil or jumping on the bandwagon to shame men, but rather highlight issues that are put forth by the patriarchy. Do I believe that it is possible that Gillette used the concept of toxic masculinity as a PR stunt to promote their products? Yes, but at the end of the day Gillette is still a company, and with the goal of any for-profit company is to make money. The advertisement was part of their Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR). This motivation has been proved by the Harvard Business Review where they also state ‘... despite sometimes questionable methodologies, these rankings attract considerable publicity. As a result, CSR has emerged as an inescapable priority for business leaders in every country” (Porter & Kamer, 2006). Although they received backlash from one of their largest/main demographics (adult men), the huge uproar on social media is still press at the end of the day, and it gets people and the media riled up enough to talk about the brand.

I do agree with Public Relations expert Mark Borowkski that “masculinity is a large part of the Gillette brand, and there is recognition in the ad that the new generation is reworking the concept of masculinity that is no longer the cliché” (Topping et al., 2019). I agree that Gillette deserves praise to a certain extent for being socially aware in today’s age. Gillette has also promised to donate one million dollars to non-profit organizations, which proves that Gillette is being ethical in their promotional material, whether if its performative or not. If Bell Media can get away with the #BellLetsTalk movement to raise money for those with mental health issues, and as a result, boosting their brand recognition, then why can’t Gillette do the same? I also agree that the immense backlash and the intensity of the negative feedback illustrated the necessary acknowledgement of the damage done by toxic masculinity and started a new discussion regarding the issue.

Regarding the course text “The revolution will be tweeted” by Blake Hounsell, he writes that the social media platform Twitter has become essential tools for momentous changes (Hounsell, 2011). This is evident in the prevalence of the #MeToo movement, which has been supported by many online as the left and many feminists have praised the Gillette commercial and its message. Many people have Twitter to tweet their concerns and dismay with the advertisement which the Guardian embeds directly in the article. According to the article “I Tweet Honestly, I Tweet Passionately” by Alice E. Marwick and Danah Boyd, they state that “Twitter is a microblogging site, originally developed for mobile phones, designed to let people post short, 140-character text updates or ‘tweets’ to a network of others” (Marwick and Boyd, 2010). This important to point out as the Guardian article explores how many individuals stated their opinion on the Gillette advertisement on Twitter specifically as a method to share their perspective on the concept of toxic masculinity. In the text “The Political Power of Social Media” by Clay Shirky, he writes that “The public's ability to coordinate such a massive and rapid response...” (Shirky, 2011). This is apparent with the mainstream, mass feedback regarding Gillette’s advertisement campaign.

In his YouTube commentary video entitled “Woke Brands,” online personality Harry Brewis states that the Gillette advertisement was a form of “outrage marketing” also referred to as shock advertising, and that the company’s intent was to create controversy (Brewis, 2019). I do not believe that Gillette’s primary intention was to create high impact in this method. I do believe that Gillette’s wanted to create a genuine and authentic attempt in starting a dialogue about toxic masculinity. The commercial did not perform in a traditional advertisement where the product is being showcased and the utility is being promoted. However, I assume Gillette’s main goal was to showcase themselves a “woke” brand, and I believe they were successful in this pursuit.

According to an article in the National Review, journalist Mona Charen states that “... everyone, left and right, who values decent behaviour should be able to agree that encouraging men to be non-violent, polite and respectful it not anti-male. It’s just civilized” (Charen, 2019). I agree with Charen as I believe that conservatives are viewing this as bashing men and stereotyping all men to be horrible individuals. But rather, I think the perspective was to depict how we can change the way how some men act and help improve their toxic mentalities. Like famous actor Terry Crews outlines in a clip included in the campaign, he announces that “men should hold other men accountable for their actions.” I believe this statement right here holds the entire video’s main message. The campaign in my opinion is not trying to insinuate that all men behave a certain way, but rather that we can raise young boys to become better men, and correct bad behaviour in order to combat it in the future.

## References
Brewis, H. (2019, February 22). Woke Brands. Retrieved from https://www.youtube.com/ watch?v=06yy88tLWlg.
Charen, M. (2019, January 17). Gillette Is Not Wrong. Retrieved from https://www.national review.com/2019/01/gillette-ad-conservative-message-on-masculinity/.
Hounshell, B. (2011). The revolution will be tweeted. Foreign policy, (187), 20.
Marwick, A. E., & Boyd, D. (2011). I tweet honestly, I tweet passionately: Twitter users, context
collapse, and the imagined audience. New media & society, 13(1), 114-133.
Porter, M. E., & Kramer, M. R. (2006, December). Strategy & Society: The Link Between Competitive Advantage and Corporate Social Responsibility. Harvard Business Review.
Shirky, C. (2011). The political power of social media: Technology, the public sphere, and political change. Foreign affairs, 28-41.
Topping, A., Lyons, K., & Weaver, M. (2019). Gillette #MeToo razors ad on ‘toxic masculinity’ gets praise – and abuse. Retrieved 1 October 2019, from https://www.theguardian.com/ world/2019/jan/15/gillette-metoo-ad-on-toxic-masculinity-cuts-deep-with-mens-rights- activists