---
image-description: Elizabeth May is seen holding a paper cup. The photo on the left is the real photo while the photo on the right has been edited. The editor added a reusable green party cup, with a metal straw.
web: https://www.instagram.com/halal_sahal
lname: Siddiqi
fname: Sahal
email: sasiddiqi@mcmaster.ca
bio: >-
  Sahal Siddiqi, 21, is a 3rd year student enrolled in the Honors Communication program at McMaster University in Hamilton, Ontario.
title: The Spread of Deceptive Media Messages
---




  

In today’s society, technology plays a huge role in everyday lives. Throughout
the past few decades, we have had a huge transition from going from analog
format, to digital format. In 1990, there were only 2.8 million people who had
access to the internet, while today there are approximately 4.6 billion internet
users world wide. This accounts for 56% of the total population today. As an
increasing amount of people gained access to the internet, cloud computing began
to rise as well. This is defined as the on demand availability of computer
system resources, especially data storage and computing power. That being said,
social network platforms have exponentially changed the way people communicate
and interact with each other. People use social media platforms like twitter to
share their thoughts and opinions on current events. As the amount of internet
users increases worldwide, so does the amount of people on social media. This
makes social media a quintessential competitor for cloud adaptation. Social
networks have helped expand internet handling by accumulating excessive
multimedia content in cloud storage systems. Majority of the cloud storage
system is made of pictures and videos uploaded by internet users. Twitter plays
a big role in the spread of news and information throughout the network.
Crowd-sourcing uses the benefits that come with the vast outreach that the
Internet provides. Mainly, drawing from its unparallel ability to gather the
creative ideologies and meaningful collaborations from every end of the globe,
and thus essentially having an infinite supply of renewable and inventive
content. However, the vastness of these infinite contributions can also
influence social platforms in a more negative sense. In my opinion, with so many
people on twitter, a platform that reflects the aspects of crowd-sourcing, there
are countless individuals posting content, promoting ideologies, and sharing
creative material. The vast amount of people, and lack of filtration, leads an
opening for fake or false content to make its way onto the internet and
ultimately be spread further by the other users of this mass hub of endless
collaboration.

            A new study analyzes about 126,000 stories tweeted by 3 million
different users over the span of 10 years. In this study, they find that true
stories do not compete with rumors and hoaxes (Meyer, 2018). Fake news out
weights the truth on twitter. When rumors reach an increasing amount of users
world wide, they tend to spread at a faster pace than authentic news. Soroush
Vosughi is a data scientist at MIT who has researched fake news since 2013. He
states that the spread of fake news may not just be because of bots, but it
could have something to do with human nature (Meyer, 2018). Scientists are
calling for a restructuring of the information ecosystem to help filter out
fabricated news stories. Fake news is created to mislead people into believing
things that the creator wants them to believe. We can commonly find this being
used on political platforms. The Knight Foundation funded a study to investigate
fake news before, during, and after the 2016 presidential election. The
researchers went through 10 million different tweet through 700,000 twitter
accounts that linked to more than 600 fake and conspiracy news sites. Many of
these pages were automated twitter accounts, meaning they were used by bots to
spread fake news. When tweets were retweeted, they would be seen by actual users
who would tend to believe what they were seeing because it aligned with their
bias. Falsehoods were 70 percent more likely to be retweeted than actual news
(Meyer, 2018). Twitter users seemed like they favoured retweeting fake news
rather than authenticated reports. Researchers found that twitter bots actually
tweeted falsified reports just as much as they tweeted validated reports, while
humans were more likely to spread fake news.

            Along with fake news, the idea of photo-shopping has become a widely
spread skill that many possess. Photoshop is used to mislead viewers into
interpreting the wrong idea. This gives people a different perspective on the
photo and can change their opinion on what ever the photo is referring to.
During the 2019 Canadian federal election, the Green Party website posted a
photo showing Elizabeth May holding a reusable cup with a metal straw. Viewers
were quick to point out that both objects were actually photoshopped into the
picture (Thomson, 2019). Deception such as this in the midst of election season
raises issues of how falsification is used in todays society (Thomson, 2019).
Parties use photoshop to make their look more appealing to others, but they also
use this technique to bring down other candidates. By photo-shopping a
misleading photo, users may see the photo and have their perception of the party
changed. When a photo is put on twitter, it can have thousands of impressions in
minutes. Although some users will be able to figure out that a photo is
photoshopped, many will still believe it.

            Photoshopping has been a practice for years now, but in this
technological era we’ve begun to see the rise of doctored videos called deep
fakes. This technology is used to generate convincing representations of events
that did not occur. People use this technology to create video and audio of
others saying or doing something that never happened. This leads to viewers
being mislead and increases the ability of malicious actors to spread false
information. As technology progresses, these videos start to appear more
realistic which makes it harder to differentiate fake from real, thus adding to
the problem of fake news.

            Researchers are developing methods to prevent the perpetuation of
fake news to mass audiences. PH.D Student, Soroush Vosughi focused his research
on social media specifically. He created an algorithm which could detect false
facts in tweets by focusing on three properties; Were they verified?, the kind
of language it used and how a given tweet would proliferate through the network
(Meyer, 2018). Although Twitter has provided a platform for people to have their
voices heard, it has also provided one for false information to be published and
spread worldwide within seconds. Twitter encompasses perspectives from all
across the globe and presents them to users everywhere. Citizen journalism has
become a big factor on twitter as it gives people a chance to show their side of
the story. With so many people able to access the internet, anybody can put
anything out there and many may choose to believe them without enough scrutiny.

Resources
---------

Meyer, R. (2018, March 12). The Grim Conclusions of the Largest-Ever Study of
Fake News. Retrieved from
[https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2018/03/largest-study-ever-fake-news-mit-twitter/555104/](https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2018/03/largest-study-ever-fake-news-mit-twitter/555104/?fbclid=IwAR2B8mKbSI6LnEkx09h4gGSQUHjzewzWbBdLh02wAwiBo1hbGm0p5n6Tqqs).

 

Forrest, M., & Thomson, S. (2019, September 24). Green Party used Photoshop to
add reusable cup and metal straw to photo of Elizabeth May. Retrieved from
[https://nationalpost.com/news/politics/election-2019/green-party-used-photoshop-to-add-reusable-cup-and-metal-straw-to-photo-of-elizabeth-may](https://nationalpost.com/news/politics/election-2019/green-party-used-photoshop-to-add-reusable-cup-and-metal-straw-to-photo-of-elizabeth-may?fbclid=IwAR11cmtQ_bMpLU5VfTHD1oV3m_eYPt3uXZyyqO-SQZZHyxekukyDJofbMTg).
