---
title: Ring&#58; Amazon’s Peephole to You
lname: Simmons
fname: Duncan
email: simmod2@mcmaster.ca
image-description: Cartoon Jeff Bezos spying on us
bio: Duncan Simmons is a 4th year multimedia and communications student at McMaster University originally from Vancouver, BC.
---
> “We know that no one ever seizes power with the intention of relinquishing it.”-George Orwell, 1984 

Amazon is a on a crusade. They want to own and monetize every aspect of our lives and will exploit every channel to do so. One of Amazon’s more recent forays into our private lives is their Ring product line; doorbells that also act as surveillance cameras and home security systems. As if giving Amazon a 24-hour live feed of your house wasn’t sketchy enough, Amazon has partnered with local law enforcement to hustle Ring in all sorts of shady ways. But there has been pushback, as Caroline Haskins highlights in her article for Vice: “Civil Rights Groups Demand End to Amazon’s Partnerships with Police”. These civil rights organizations are bringing awareness to the dangers of giving a massive corporation this level of access, yet Amazon and Ring continue to be astronomical successes. Amazon has accrued a lot of power in a lot of different ways over its lifetime, largely without consequence; and people continue to be loyal customers under the spell of one-day free shipping. Amazon may be here to stay, but that does not mean that they should have free licence on our information.  

On August 8, Vice News published an article, Everything You Need to Know About Ring, Amazon’s Surveillance Camera Company. The article highlights the history of Ring, as well as some of the disturbing things Amazon is deploying Ring for since acquiring them. Amazon purchased Ring in April of 2008 for about 850 million dollars. Even for a company with nearly unlimited financial resources, that is a big investment. Amazon did not just buy a breakthrough in home security, they bought unlimited access to every Ring user. Jeff Bezos is a vampire, and he got us to invite him through our front door, and we’re paying him to suck our blood. Through a few different questionable side projects attached to Ring, Amazon is data mining in a way that is unparalleled. 

 One of these nefarious sub-plots is called Neighbours.  An app that uses Ring user’s footage to gather crime data. The data is collected by Amazon employees, not law-enforcement directly, who can create alerts about specific people or places that get sent to all Neighbours users in the area. That means Amazon can pick and choose the type of people they want to marginalize, and they have. Vice conducted a study on who the app targets in the course of writing their article, and they found that most people the app labelled as “suspicious” were people of colour. This is an obvious issue unto itself but becomes especially concerning when you add the fact that Amazon supplies this data to police in exchange for special treatment.  

Amazon has partnered with over 300 North American police departments who in return hustle their products to their citizens. Amazon supplies police with coaching on how to push their products, and free product to give away to get people interested. By entering into this deal with Amazon, the police get access to Ring footage without a warrant but must make some moral sacrifices. The police departments are required to get all statements about Ring approved by the company and are sent scripts on how to talk about the company which includes language advertising their products. This implicit control over law enforcement poses a significant threat to personal privacy and freedom. Every function that a police officer is required to perform requires objectivity, and they cannot be fully impartial with Amazon’s commercial investment. Amazon has used a façade of good will to gain influence, which they will inevitably take advantage of. Amazon has already proved they can turn this influence into action by involving themselves in law enforcement operations. With help from undercover police officers, Amazon coordinates fake package deliveries with the intention of entrapping someone. The deliveries are placed at houses equipped with Ring cameras with the goal of arresting someone in the act of stealing it. They then take results from the sting operations to create a map of higher crime areas which is given to the local police. Police departments getting involved with Amazon is a dangerous precedent for the private sector getting involved in public protection. With money at stake, Amazon cannot be trusted to be fair and impartial in their data collection because they have to serve their bottom line before anything else. 

Separately from their police partnerships, Amazon has made deals with city governments to push Ring on their citizens. Cities will pay up to a hundred thousand dollars of taxpayer money to subsidize Ring for people living there. Like the police deals, cities are required to promote Ring as part of their contract. This turns our elected officials into mascots for Amazon’s goals. These local governments are showing favouritism to a company, which goes against the free market ideals of capitalism. Citizens should be free to make decisions about what they want to buy, without our trusted officials shoving coupons in their face. We should all be concerned for our privacy when all it takes get whole city governments and police forces in your back pocket is a better mousetrap and aggressive marketing. 

Amazon is using their technology as excuse to collect data on private lives and present it in any way they see fit. They have used money to influence the police, who are supposed to operate without outside pressure, and local governments, which are supposed to protect our interests and rights. Amazon does not have the checks and balances or civil responsibility of law enforcement. By letting Amazon into the system, the system is corruptible. It is only a matter of time before Amazon sees fit to exercise their influence in a more significant and scary way. They cannot be trusted to be impartial in their decisions or actions because with stockholders to answer to, there will always be an agenda to serve. Therefore, they cannot be trusted with the information they collect. Amazon becomes more menacing and dangerous with every Ring product they sell. 

---

### Bibliography
- Haskins, C. (2019, August 8). Everything You Need to Know About Ring, Amazon's Surveillance Camera Company. Retrieved from https://www.vice.com/en_ca/article/qvg48d/everything-you-need-to-know-about-ring-amazons-surveillance-camera-company.