---
title: Beyond the Frame 
lname: Sousa
fname: Jennifer
email: sousaj5@mcmaster.ca
image-description: Various old, multi-coloured, wooden frames leaning pell-mell against a wall.
bio: Jennifer Sousa is a third-year communications studies student at McMaster University. Originally from Cienfuegos, Cuba, she now lives in Mississauga, Ontario, Canada. Her favourite Disney princess character as a child was Belle, because she shares her love of books and reading. Some of her other interests include&#58; travelling, baking, coffee, and music. Upon graduation, Jennifer hopes to begin her career in the feild of strategic communication for the financial industry. 
---

Ever since its creation, the journey of photography, both its physical and cultural developments, has been documented extensively. It began as a functional tool and quickly became embedded in our cultural practices. Susan Sontag, in “On Photography” (1977), speaks to our dependence on photographs to be able to capture and portray the objective truths of reality.
Van Dijck, in her 2008 study, explored how personal photography has evolved from a primary role of memory capturing and experience to one of communication and identity formation. Recently, Stephen Mayes (2015) address computational photography and its ability to transcend people’s imaginations. All these developments gave way to a revolution of photography wherein the cultural mainstream underwent deeper transformations than simply technological; a photograph is composed of much more than just what is visible within the frame.

## Transparent.
Sontag said that, “While a painting or a prose description can never be other than a narrowly selective interpretation, a photograph can be treated as a narrowly selective transparency” (p. 6, 1977). That’s to say that a photo should not be subjective; that it should be able to reproduce a moment of time exactly and entirely as it exists in reality. As the degree of photo manipulability increases, the greater degree of worry amongst audiences that the truth is being concealed. But who decides this photographic truth? The truths that we derive from reality are only as correct as we choose to interpret them. Photographs, paintings, novels, and the like, are all symbolic representations of reality, and any depiction, regardless of medium, is not free from human subjectivity. We seem to recognize this characteristic in almost all renderings expect for the photograph, which requires every bit as interpretation as any painting or written description. Mayes makes the point that we have already learned and mastered the skill of deciphering and distinguishing information that is presented to us. For example, “...written journalism (which is driven entirely by the writer’s imaginative ability to interpret reality in symbolic form)...” (2015) is not construed as fact, and “...we don’t confuse advertising imagery with documentary, nor the photo illustration on a magazine’s cover with the reportage inside” (Mayes, 2015). Every photo is traced with infinite, inseparable layers of meanings that are informed by the photographer’s, and the audience’s, unique positionality.

## Non-participatory.
How involved should a photographer be in capturing a moment? The popular opinion is ‘very little to not at all’; in order to ‘capture’, one should not have to intervene or influence. This opinion was expressed by Sontag in the following words: “Photography is essentially an act of non-intervention” (p. 11, 1977). This is a position held by many photography traditionalists: by photographing a scene, you are capturing it without participating in the formation or outcome of what is to be represented. This notion has been completely rejected in modern practice. The creation of the final project is entirely reliant on the photographer’s visionary and creative choices. At the very least, the photographer made the decision to point the lens towards a specific point at a specific time, and that action was participating in the legacy of that moment. And at the very most, once the data has been collected by the camera, there’s an infinite amount of possibilities on how to depict that moment. Mayes highlights this point very astutely in his article. Images are dynamic and responsive and they demand a high level of intervention from the photographer to fully capture the spirit of the photo, as defined by the photographer. Every stage of the process from the moment the shutter snaps to the moment that the final product is being evaluated by its audiences, the photographer’s frame of mind is informing how the image changes between steps, and this is a, often unconscious, participation that is entirely necessary and inexplorable to photography.  

## Informative.
Perhaps the most universally accepted norm regarding photographs is that they “... are valued because they give information” (Sontag, p. 22, 1977). While this is certainly true, the nature of that information has made dramatic shifts towards, what I believe, to more inclusive, creative, dynamic forms of information. There exists concern in the public that when visual information is manipulated, it takes away from the objective reality portrayed in the photograph. However, since we’ve established that reality only exists how we choose to interpret it, we can acknowledge that photographs can therefore provide a breadth of information about different concurrent realities. With the advent of so much manipulability we are able to provide much greater information about the context, the time, the photographer, the subject, and so many other features that we previously could not do with traditional, early photography. In this way we are able to “...create a picture of reality that is infinitely richer than a simple visual record, and with this comes the opportunity to incorporate deeper levels of knowledge” (Mayes, 2015) and more informational cues about the nature and intention of the photograph. 

We got used to the idea that photographs were supposed to capture reality as it was physically there; nothing more than a visual record of our lives. Later, trends of aestheticism and democratizing the technology gave birth to the artistic function of photography. Then, technological developments really screwed us up in regards to how we came to conceptualize the photograph. I think we forget that reality is informed by each of our own unique perspectives. No two people look at an object and see it the same way; how, therefore, can we expect photography to capture a nonexistent, impartial third meaning independent from the photographer themself and their multitude of audiences. Now more than ever, with greater degrees of diversity in thought and experience, do we need to recall our positionality while reading imagery, no matter what purpose it serves. 


## Resources

Mayes, Stephen. (25 Aug. 2015). The Next Revolution in Photography Is Coming. _Time_. Retrieved from time.com/4003527/future-of-photography/. 

Sontag, S. (1977). In Plato's Cave from On Photography. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. p. 3, 24.

Van Dijck, J. (2008). Digital photography: communication, identity, memory. _Visual Communication, 7_(1), 57-76.