---
title: Photo Manipulation and Misappropriation and the Spread of Fake News
lname: Spiropoulos
fname: Sophia
Image description: On the left the common shared manipulated image of the crowd at Donald Trump’s Inauguration in 2017, on the right the actual crowd at Trump’s Inauguration, substantially larger than what it was made out to be in the media
Bio: Sophia Spiropoulos is a third year student at McMaster University in Hamilton, working towards getting a Honours Multimedia (B.A.) degree.

---

Photographs have always accompanied news articles, whether they be drawings of what happened or actual photographs of the event, but unlike today, these images were often honest depictions which aided in conveying the truthful message of the story. Now we are in an age where anybody has access to a camera and can not only take photos but manipulate them. This abundance of photography has also led to the misappropriation of the meaning of the original image. Now publishers and article writers will take any photo out of context in order to help them in conveying a specific message, even if the original image has nothing to do with it in the first place.

When a photo is presented in the format of an article or posted to social media with a caption, people will often take it as the truth. In her book *On Photography*, Susan Sontag talks about how “photographed images do not seem to be statements about the world so much as pieces of it” and that “there is always a presumption that something exists, or did exist, which is like what’s in the picture.” Sontag, in this sense, is talking about images on their own, but when you place those images in context with a group of text, it makes these statements even more true.

One example of not only manipulation of an image, but misappropriation of it is a photograph of the Canada Green Party leader, Elizabeth May. The manipulated photograph depicts May holding a reusable Green Party cup, where the original photo depicts her using a single use cup. Although it doesn’t seem like such a big deal, the fact the Green Party manipulated the image to make her look more environmentally friendly stirs up controversy because it makes you think what else they are hiding. The cup in the original image, although it is single use, seems to be made of paper and therefore recyclable, which would have stirred up little to no controversy as it appears to be on brand and lines up with the Party’s beliefs. Although this is a small thing, it betrays the trust of the people who support the Green Party, making them question if this is an isolated event, or whether they have been lied to before.

Another example of manipulation is a photograph shared by NRA supporters on Social Media of Emma Gonzalez. Unlike the photo of Elizabeth May, this photo has been taken completely out of context of its original purpose. The manipulated photo depicts Emma Gonzalez, one of the Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School students, ripping up the United States Constitution. The original image from Teen Vogue magazine shows Emma ripping up a target. The second amendment of the US constitution is the right to bear arms, which is why the NRA made this image because to them, gun control is the equivalent of tearing up the constitution, the foundations of the basic American rights.

In the article *How Photos Fuel the Spread of Fake News* by Laura Mallonee on Wired, Laura talks about how photographic manipulation is one thing but misappropriation of a photo in the news is far more sinister. Mallonee talks about how the people who publish and promote fake news deliberately take photos out of context knowing people will look at them in the context of what they are reading and accept them as the truth. Even though some misappropriations are a far reach from what the publishers are trying to say, it doesn’t stop the public from believing them when put in that context. Mallonee gives an example of a meme which shows the father of the Pulse nightclub shooter visiting Hillary Clinton's Office at the State Department in 2016, even though Hillary had resigned from that job three years earlier. When a misappropriated photo from an article vaguely lines up with the personal opinions of the reader it makes it that much more convincing in their mind that the photo must be the truth because of their own preconceived beliefs. Laura explains that photos are key in making fake news stories successful because they elicit an emotional response which makes it more likely that a person will click on it and share it.

One example of photo misappropriation comes from the United States Presidential election in 2016. Before the presidential election, each of the candidates held rally's in different cities across the US to help convince locals to vote for them. These rallies were often extravagant and large, at least they looked that way in the media, being shown on Twitter, Facebook and various news websites. The example depicts a Hillary Clinton rally in Omaha. The photo along with the caption makes the crowd seem large and energetic. The woman who posted the photo on Twitter, Abby D. Phillip, a Whitehouse correspondent for CNN, used words like big and boisterous to help describe the event. Another twitter user responded to Abby’s tweet, showing a picture of the mere 50 people who showed up to the rally crowded around Hillary in a gym with most of the room still empty. This photograph showcased the reality of the situation and demonstrated to people how easy it is for anyone to use a strategic angle and a specific caption to help twist reality into what they want to be shown.

When the intended audience view these photos in the context of which they are framed, it is extremely difficult for them to see the pictures for what they actually are instead of what they are made out to be. The ubiquity of photomanipulation and misappropriation in the media has brought fake news into a whole new era which makes it a lot harder to tell who is telling the truth and who is lying. When photographs started accompanying articles in newspapers, it was extremely difficult for them to manipulate the images because of the lack of technology. People could easily misappropriate photos, but since photography had only been around for a short while, the thought of having them represent something different from what they were did not come up. This new photomanipulation technology along with the ubiquity of photography makes it easier for news sharing platforms to take photos and use them in whatever way they want.


### Resources

Mallonee, L. (2017, June 3). How Photos Fuel the Spread of Fake News. Retrieved from https://www.wired.com/2016/12/photos-fuel-spread-fake-news/.

Sontag, S. (2008). On photography. London: Penguin Books.