---
title: The Dangers of The Internet and How it Can Save You
lname: Swan
fname: Mayia
email: swanm1@mcmaster.ca
image-description: image by Sara Kurfess, facebook and twitter icons
---

The internet is a scary place. A place with infinite data, where you can get the answer to any question or thought in a single click. The internet and the amalgam social media with it, both have the ability to foster new job opportunities, business partnerships, relationships and even have offered a place to expand the marketplace. Considering all of the good offered through social media and the internet, what could go wrong? The answer is simple: a lot. As social media and the entertainment industry evolve with society, we have seen an introduction and an acceptance of a new sort of internet culture that embraces and glamorizes depression and other more severe mental illnesses. We see through the shows people watch, the way certain users engage with various platforms and what they give and take from them. Social media can help or hinder our own perceptions and can leave not only to a form of self-destruction but can also be a potential saviour. In Emma Grey Ellis’ article _Social Media Is Ruining Our Minds—It Also Might Save Them_, Ellis explains how “websites that promote self-harm, suicide, and eating disorders abound, and many have hard-to-spot social media presences that no platform has quite figured out how to moderate: They’re arguably some of the internet’s most toxic filter bubbles” (Ellis, 2018).

Ellis states how  the internet “can be especially damaging for those struggling with mental illness” (2018). Society has evolved in a way where on and offline we have begun to speak up about those suffering with mental illness. What we have learned is that the presence and use of social media has greatly impacted the mental health of teens and young adults quicker than before. The ways in which we have access to such freedom online, allows those suffering to express their thoughts, feelings and pain through various forms of media and although that may be a way to get that off of their chest, it puts these ideas into others heads and essentially establishes a normality. The problem with the internet and mental illness is that “searching for information about your struggles may lead you into dark places. Websites that promote self-harm, suicide, and eating disorders abound, and many have hard-to-spot social media presenceshttps://www.wired.com/story/how-pro-eating-disorder-posts-evade-social-media-filters/ that no platform has quite figured out how to moderate: They’re arguably some of the internet’s most toxic filter bubbles” (Ellis, 2018). Through crowdsourcing, which “involves obtaining work, information, or opinions from a large group of people who submit their data via the Internet, social media, and smartphone apps” (Investopedia, 2019), these websites are able to collect data from users and target those whom suffer with mental illness and offer potential help.

On platforms such as twitter we create our own self-image and identity. We filter what we want others to see through what we post. This can have very positive and negative effects when it comes to those suffering with mental illness. Twitter for example can be a great way to make business connections and read the news, but it has an unofficial reputation among those in their teens to those in their late twenty’s as a platform that tends to possess a lot darker media, and tends to humorize things such as depression and destructive thoughts. With that said, social media platforms are taking action to try and help teens who do suffer from mental illness, “last year, Facebook created an algorithm to monitor teenagers’ moods for signs of insecurity and worthlessness (both risk factors for suicidal thoughts) for the purpose of serving them ads for mental health services” (Ellis, 2018). Facebook, Google and other media services track your internet usage and target ads, videos, and other media to those they gather need these services most. As Ellis explains, “there’s a lot of interest in learning from those clicks, getting people a targeted ad, and getting them the help they need that way” (2018). Another positive aspect of social media, is “Darren Baker found that some online communities can foster genuinely nurturing environments for those suffering from mental health problems, even when the problem was as serious as suicidal ideation.” After the release of Netflix series, _13 Reasons Why_, many people have expressed their beliefs on how the show glamorizes suicide, depression, and other mental illnesses. After the realise of this show in particular, “researchers estimate there was a 13.3 percent increase in suicide among tweens and teens” (CBC, 2019). Although for those impacted by the shows and other videos of these types that became popular afterwards, “Naslund’s research found “naturally occurring peer support” in YouTube comments sections, of all places” (Ellis, 2018). Ellis explains two different approaches in which we use the internet to protect our minds. First, “using targeted ads make people aware of services that already exist, and starting new social platforms designed to encourage peer-to-peer support” (Ellis, 2018). All of this research and patterns demonstrate the positive and negative waves we witness with users of social media.

After the recognition around the relationship between the internet and mental illnesses, “a new round of products focuses on meeting prospective patients where they are—on social media—and drawing them to tools and services that already exist. ‘There have been excellent results in suicide prevention when researchers have been able to recruit patients right off the internet, just based on what they’re clicking,’ says John Naslund, who studies digital mental health at Harvard Medical School” (Ellis, 2018). In Ellis’ article she shines light to a social media network called Wisdo. Boaz Goan who is the CEO and founder of Wisdo explains how “Wisdo connects users with others who already have been through whatever tough life experience they’re having” (Ellis, 2018). Part of the inspiration for him creating this app was due to the discovery that “researchers at the University of Pittsburgh who found that social media increases loneliness”, (Ellis 2018) and Goan wanted to provide a means to an end. “Goan conducted a survey of Wisdo’s users, asking them to gauge their feeling of isolation. “Loneliness dropped by 15 percentage points compared with other social media sites”, Boaz says. “It means that what we put in place is helping people find the wisdom and support and human connection that they’re lacking” (Ellis, 2018).

As Ellis blatantly states in the title of her article _Social Media Is Ruining Our Minds-It Also Might Save Them_, social media sites are one of the leading contributors to hindered self-perception among teens today. With users sharing dark media on platforms such as Facebook and twitter, we have seen an increase in mental illnesses such as depression. However, today more than ever, platforms have gained knowledge through data collection and have begun to target users who show signs of these mental illnesses with the help they need. Not only that, but the Internet has created a place where anyone can simply search for potential solutions to problems they are having and become part of online community with people going through the same thing. Although social media can potentially expose users to harmful content, it also has the potential to provide all sorts of help and safe place, it all depends on how you use it.

Works Cited

CBC. (2019, May 29). Retrieved from Netflix series 13 Reasons Why tied to more youth suicides, U.S. study suggests: https://www.cbc.ca/news/health/13-reasons-why-suicide-study-1.5154833

Crowdsourcing. (2019, July 8). Retrieved from Investopedia: https://www.investopedia.com/terms/c/crowdsourcing.asp

Ellis, E. (2018, December 13). Social Media Is Ruining Our Minds—It Also Might Save Them. Retrieved from WIRED: https://www.wired.com/story/social-media-mental-health-terrible-salvation/
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

 

 
