---
title: Deep Fake News&#58; What Can Be Done
lname: Trotman
fname: Ryan
email: trotmanr@mcmaster.ca
image-description: Two Mask of contrasting white and black, with one placed in front of the other. With a red to orange gradient background.
bio: Ryan Trotman is a third year undergraduate student, double majoring in multimedia and communication, at McMaster University. Living in Hamilton Ontario, Ryan is an aspiring photographer and graphic designer, going by the name of The West Line Sight on instagram. Ryan has many media related interests with notable ones being editing, filming and writing for projects.
---

In today's modern world advancements are made everyday. Either as compensation
for things we as a society have not figured out yet, or as improvements for
things we have. All the while we as people living in this ever progressing
technical marvel of human made nature, are trying to find uses for them. The
trick that faces us is that as we progress we risk the chance of letting the
tech get away from us, and become corrupted by our society. One such dangerous
progression is the progression of digital editing, more specifically Deepfakes.

As illustrated in the article by Simonite, Deepfakes are a new technical
phenomena. One that can be exploited, if applied correctly by the wrong people.
Many have put it to use as a source of entertainment, as seen in China with the
app called Zao as Simonite mentioned (Simonite, 2019). Along with people on the
internet using it to overlay actors likeness of each other on talk shows. Yet
were it gets dangerous is with its capacity for deception. With digital editing
technology that reaches the heights of deepfakes, anyone can pretend to be
anyone else, even someone of influence. Good examples can be found all over the
web, one of the best being Jordan peele deliberately recording and talking
extremely casually about current matters using the image of former president
Barack Obama (Vincent, 2018). While Peele is well known for playing the former
president and the video was made with full transparency, one would have never
known if not for the side beside comparison and explanation. At least no truth
would have come out until after long amounts of analysis, by which point any
potential damage would have been done.

Deepfakes can poses a serious problem to all facets of society. Imagine that
both an everyday teenager and high ranking official can have their career and
their lives ruined with the spreading of false images and videos. They no longer
have to be present or even remotely involved, to make it look convincing. Fact
check is now an important part of the media process, understanding what is real
and what is fake is vital, since now this tech has the increased possibility to
sway political agendas and feelings even more so then it did before. We as a
global society have already seen the effects minor doctoring and twisting of the
context of images can do to help inform public opinion. These doctorings and
twistings could be better summarized as fake news.

The issue that we face with this collaboration is that it can lead to a slippery
slope. Yet despite the danger we face, deep fakes are still in a state of
purgatory in terms of people knowing what to do with it. All the while, the
prevalence of social media and our reliance on visual verification has made it
easy for those that wish to exploit the Deepfake program can do so with as large
of an audience as they want. Coupled with a culture that has become desensitized
by the sheer amount of content they have to absorb. Plus with recent political
development, society has had to get used to taking many accusations and
proclamations with a grain of salt. This casualness to shocking new developments
is dangerous, as we will not be properly prepared or fully informed about the
potential consequences that could unfold in the future. Reports like the one
from Paul Barret urge for the serious preparation against deep fake technology
(Simonite, 2019). Such instances as the Russian hackings could just be the
beginning for political unrest in the US and for that matter many other
countries.

Now the question is “what do we do about it”. How does one go about making sure
that society can do its business without it being tampered with on a daily
basis. For some, it will be easy as the greatest asset of deepfakes is also
ours. The vastness of the internet makes it hard for putting a stop to deepfakes
altogether, but it also allows for multiple points of information to exist. This
double sided blade allows for those that are willing and have the sense to fact
check (the natural enemy of fake news) to do so. It doesn’t take much as there
is always someone out there with the other half, third or quarter of the story
that can shed more light on a situation. The power that both deepfake technology
and fake news feed on is that of laziness and ignorance. While it is reasonable
to think and enforce, for the media sites to have a responsibility and
obligation to limit false hoods. It is also reasonable to think that if we have
identified an issue, one should take measures on themselves to make sure that
they do not succumb to that issue.

Deep fakes and fake news while at different points in their life cycle in
culture, are two perfectly matched methods of deception. While the concepts they
were invented from are nothing new, in modern media society they are a dangerous
and complicated look into our future. While like with everything, there is much
we can do to cope and limit the damage, they will be a constant threat if we let
our guard down. For those that would wish to use these cultural and
technological exploits, they are the ones that see society as single minded and
not aware of what goes on around them. It is up to use to make sure that while
technology and culture progress we do not let ourselves fall behind.

 

 

\#\# Resources

Simonite, T. (2019, September 4). Forget Politics. For Now, Deepfakes Are for
Bullies. Retrieved from
https://www.wired.com/story/forget-politics-deepfakes-bullies/.

Vincent, J. (2018, April 17). Watch Jordan Peele use AI to make Barack Obama
deliver a PSA about fake news. Retrieved from
https://www.theverge.com/tldr/2018/4/17/17247334/ai-fake-news-video-barack-obam
a-jordan-peele-buzzfeed.

\---
