---
title: Instagram's Ruining Lives
lname: Visser
fname: Jesse
email: vissej1@mcmaster.ca
web: www.instagram.com/jessstravel/
image-description: 
bio: From Guelph ON, Jesse is a Third Year Multimedia and Communications student who hopes to persue a career in film, graphic design, and advertising someday.
---

Why is it that everyone who uses Instagram seems to appear to have a picture-perfect life? Whether you’re endlessly scrolling and see the couple who just got engaged, a group of friends celebrating a night out in fancy clothes, someone you know traveling the world and eating exotic foods, or even someone posting their incredible body after continuously going to the gym. While all of these scenarios seem similar in which these people are living their *best life*, each picture fails to hide the story, or rather the difficult times behind each perfect picture. The article, “Instagram is supposed to be friendly. So why is it making people so miserable?” written by Alex Hern in 2017, furthers the idea that Instagram is a powerful, yet dangerously addicting social media app used by people to make their lives appear greater than it is. Our society uses Instagram as an escape from their real lives to seek validation from others that their life is just as good as others- if not better. The problem is that we are **ALL** guilty of this unhealthy cycle, regardless of what platform we choose to broadcast our fictional lives on. The article also discusses how using Instagram and constantly being exposed to content like this can correlate feelings of jealousy and insecurity when comparing your life to the lives you see on Instagram. The truth is, Instagram does not reflect reality; it is a highlight reel that people use to show off to their followers which ultimately harms our overall mental health and well-being.

A major theme focused on in this article is how Instagram is used to portray only the highlights of people’s lives. In some cases, this may seem completely harmless and may even be motivating for some people to improve their everyday lives. Although comparing your life and trying to live up to the standards of a picture that is unrealistic in the first place can cause difficulties in finding happiness within ourselves. We fall into the trap ourselves because even if we are living miserably while looking at other people’s *‘perfect lives’* we still share unreal versions of our own lives to make them appear better than they are (Hern, 2017, pg. 2). Instagram first began as a positive and friendly way to share important memories, places, and people with others you are friends with. However, Instagram has now transformed into a competitive platform of who lives a better life and endures the best experiences. When looking at the pictures I used to post compared to now, it is clear that I have also fallen into the trap of pretending to be someone I’m not. For instance, I used to focus on posting scenery pictures, and pictures with my family and friends that I actually hang out with. Yet all I see now when looking at my profile is a person trying to fit in with the rest of society; posting pictures of myself, pictures of me drinking/partying, and making it seem as if I am always traveling to new places. Anyone who personally knows me and how I live my life would know that my Instagram is only a portion of what my actual life consists of. My Instagram hides the nights I spend alone doing homework, working full time, or simply just being a normal working student because no one cares to see that on Instagram. This can relate to the term known as the **digital self** where media changes the person using it who conforms to the digital world by creating new versions of themselves.
	
Not only does Instagram portray only the highlights of people’s lives, but using the app can create feelings of loneliness, jealousy, insecurity, depression, and even ‘FOMO’ which is the *'fear of missing out’*. I am guilty of feeling these emotions after endless scrolling, constantly checking the app for no intended reason, and eventually, I end up comparing my life to other people that I follow. I begin to compare myself, my life, my relationships, my job, and ultimately **everything** that makes me who I am due to how people portray their own lives on Instagram. Another reason for feeling these emotions whether you’re following famous and rich celebrities or just people you know is because every time the app is opened you are presented with people such as friends, family, and others, enjoying their ‘best life’ without you there. This can make you feel as if you’re missing out on life around you while you’re staring down at your phone on Instagram and looking at other people out living their lives rather than enjoying yours. Instagram makes you feel that we should all be living the same life, and if we’re not then something must be wrong with us. Other examples of how Instagram can correlate to feelings of insecurity and jealousy are portrayed in the article such as how girls often use the app to look at pictures of other girls they wished they looked like, using it to get over an ex but are constantly reminded of them causing an unhealthy obsession, looking at warped and edited images of women and men, and using the app to look at luxuries that you cannot afford that only realistically people with money can have, thus causing insecurity and jealousy (Hern, 2017, pg. 2). 

Unfortunately, Instagram has now turned into a competitive platform where everyone is trying to one-up each other and appear to have a superior, unreal life that does not truly exist. If you have Instagram, you would know yourself that the app has turned into a competition of who has the best aesthetic, the fanciest clothes, the nicest car, and the most friends, but just how competitive can it be? If you take a closer look at Instagram, you would notice that through editing apps, filters, or simply only showing highlights rather than what happens behind the scenes, can produce hyperreal photos that appear as if they are real but do not reflect reality. This ignites even more of an unhealthy popularity contest for people on Instagram by resorting to buying followers, likes, and comments, appearing to be more popular than they really are; which is essentially how creators and influencers compete with each other to be at the *'top'* (Hern, 2017, pg. 3). Every day I witness girls who are easily influenced by other people on Instagram and try to compete by editing their bodies, eyes, skin, and more just to fit in with the rest of the crowd. Even when I was young, I used to edit my pictures on Facebook by editing my eyes to be ‘bluer’ and smoothing out my skin in selfies so that people would think I am just as pretty as other girls. Fortunately, I realized that what I was doing was lying to not only myself, but the people that actually know me, and stopped portraying myself as someone I was not. 
	
All in all, in a society where we are constantly surrounded by social media where people seem to be living perfect lives, we have become easily susceptible and influenced by the media that we absorb. This eventually leads to us believing almost everything we see, even if it seems too good to be true because our sense of reality is distorted by the everyday posts we consider to be ‘real’. However, the article, “Instagram is supposed to be friendly. So why is it making people so miserable?” presented three major themes of how Instagram can be dangerous for our well-being and happiness within our lives. The article discussed how Instagram does not reflect reality as it only depicts the highlights of people’s lives, how the app can cause feelings of jealousy and insecurity, and the unhealthy competition of comparing ourselves to each other that Instagram ignites between people. After reading this article, I found that I can relate many of these instances to my own life and how I personally use Instagram. From a new perspective, I feel that we should embrace how different each one of our lives is even though Instagram has made us feel that we should all be living the same life. In conclusion, not everything you do in your life needs to be posted for validation from people you may not even know. Start living your life the way you want to- it is time you start living for **yourself** rather than for your fictional life on Instagram. 

Work Cited
Hern, A. (2018, September 17). Instagram is supposed to be friendly. So why is it making people 	so miserable? Retrieved October 5, 2019, from 		                		https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2018/sep/17/instagram-is-supposed-to-be-friendly-so-why-is-it-making-people-so-miserable.

Photo: Photo by energepic.com from Pexels
