---
title: Politicians fear this like fire
lname: Wang
fname: Jenny
email: wangs90@mcmaster.ca
image-description: A deepfake Donald Trump (right) based on talkshow host Jimmy Fallon’s impression of the president (left)
bio: 3rd year Multimedia, McMaster University
---

Tom Simonite has published a web page article on September 4, 2019, named ‘Forget Politics. For Now, Deepfakes Are For Bullies’ to pass on the idea of the widely used Deepfake technology and its malignant social impact. Over the past 50 years, our world has drastically changed with the development of digital computing, which makes artificial intelligence in the 21st century an indispensable role. However, the advancement and accessibility also allow AI to be easily manipulated by people with wrongful intentions. Technology and tools have changed people's perspective, but we should retain our own critical ideas when it coming to viewing things.

Within the context of this course, a lot of the in-class discussions surround how the social image has drastically changed the way people perceive others. For example, from lecture slides, there was a picture pulled from a Facebook post. The captions said, ‘Immigrates people are flying the Honduras flag as they burn the American flag as they much towards the USA wanting asylum! They are not asylum seekers! They are invaders!’. Under this post, a staggering number of 19,000 people shared the photos, but it turned out none of these photos were accurate. And it just showed how social image as a communicative medium can often deliver the wrong messages with the importance of imagery in our culture. And with the increasing accessibility to different tools and platforms, manipulation of social image is generally leading to a debate of both good and bad sides of these tools and how much do we benefit from them. 

Deepfake is short for ‘deep learning’ and ‘fake’. It is a technology for to artificially synthesis images using machine learning. It is used to superimpose existing images and videos onto source images or videos using a deep learning technique known as generative adversarial network. (Simonite,2019) From the article, Simonite has mentioned ‘Zao’, which was one of the many popular Chinese apps that have gone viral on the Chinese app store. ‘Zao’ allowed its users to upload pictures of their own faces and swap them with celebrities in movie and TV clips. As cool and interesting as it may sound, Deepfakes have raised a lot of concerns in the US and elsewhere. For example, one of the major concerns was if this could be used to sway elections, or if there could be videos are modified to misrepresent a politician or a public image. Simonite says, “The technology is more likely to become a small-scale weapon used to extend online harassment and bullying.” (Simonite,2019)  

Artificial Intelligence had brought us convenience in life and helped people with things we could never imagine in the past. People tend to believe what they see first, and sometimes the truth can get complicated, especially under the fast-growing mass media. Just imagine someone who wants to disrupt an upcoming election and creates tons of videos about a candidate using derogatory language to disrespect women's rights. Although the contents are artificial and inaccurate, the majority of the viewers may not be able to differentiate between what is real and what is man-created. And such videos have enough power to create immediate reactions on voters as they shape public narratives. For example, there are lots of eye-catching fake clips of Barack Obama and Mark Zuckerberg making public speeches. Their videos are made for educational purposes as they demonstrate the vast potential of AI’s ‘face-swapping’ technology. (Mouradian, 2019) However, an undesired yet unavoidable side effect of this technology has emerged from gaining millions of public views and has fed ideas about its ability to swap mass opinions, such as elections. Currently, researchers and companies such as Deep Trace have put in a lot of efforts on detecting these artificially created videos, so-called Deepfakes, but no detectors yet met the expected accuracy and proven to be reliable enough. Sam Gregory is an expert in AI and has been tracking the potential impacts of Deepfakes for many years. Gregory describes one of the many problems with deep fake as “the tools gap.” As technology advances, the Deepfake tools is taking off so quickly that it has partially become programs that are readily available for non-tech-savvy people to experiment with. However, yet there are only a few resources out there that are able to accurately track the fakes once they are released on the internet. “As companies release products that enable creation, they should release products that enable detection as well,” Gregory says. (Mouradian, 2019)

Despite all the side effects, there are also plenty of good outcomes from Deepfakes. According to Data Science, Charleer has described that we should take everything we saw as a ‘grain of salt’. (Charleer, 2018) Under the big environmental circumstances, the society we are living in is full of decision makings. Things we saw and read will shape our thoughts and beliefs from the words. We used to believe photographs are real and think how beautiful this world is, then photoshop came to birth. And Deepfake has just added another layer on the screen canvas and is using another medium to make influences. All the technology happen for a reason, either we need it to do good things or bad, just like social image manipulation and the Deepfakes. We are in a critical yet exciting era where we witness the changes driven by technologies. Although they are making us to be aware of everything we see, we read and we hear, and ‘Be more critical! Think for yourself’(Charleer, 2018) The importance thing is that, instead of criticizing the inevitable changes that technologies are making, we need to learn to adapt to them utilize them for greater social purposes. 


Reference: 
Charleer, S. (2018, March 17). Why Deepfakes are a good thing. Retrieved from                               https://towardsdatascience.com/why-deepfakes-are-a-good-thing-10ceb86deaed. 
McFadden, C. (2019, July 9). Deepfakes Are Bad but They Could Also   Have Some Advantages.          Retrieved from https://interestingengineering.com/deepfakes-are-bad-but-what-are-some-of-the-possible-advantages. 
Mouradian, L. (2019, July 2). Opinion: Deepfakes are upon us, and an effective response is essential. Retrieved from 
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ng-interactive/2019/jun/22/the-rise-of-the-deepfake-and-the-threat-to-democracy
Simonite, T. (2019, September 4). Forget Politics. For Now, Deepfakes Are for Bullies.Retrieved from https://www.wired.com/story/forget-politics-deepfakes-bullies/. 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
