---
bio: >-
  I am in my third year at McMaster University in the Multimedia Honours
  program, minoring in Indigenous studies. I am on the McMaster University
  women's hockey team as well as the McMaster University Sailing team. I love
  watching YouTube and following along with my favourite YouTubers lives. This
  is why I choose to do my editorial on a YouTube related topic that is very
  current in todays society.
email: websterb@mcmaster.ca
image-description: Screen shot of the YouTube account "Tea Spill"
lname: Webster
fname: Bridget
title: Allowing Tea Accounts to Do Their Thing is the Real Tea
---


YouTube is one of the most popular social media platforms today, and some of the
people who make videos on it are very famous. “YouTubers” and their entire lives
are on display for everyone who watches them. With this fame and the fact that
their lives are so public, means their followers want to know about every aspect
of their lives, and there are channels on YouTube made just for that. *How Tea
Accounts are Fueling Influencer Feuds* is an article written by Taylor Lorenz
that talks about such channels, which shed light on and sometimes expose
YouTubers on things they have done, good and bad, and form their own opinions on
the matter. If YouTubers want to include their personal fights and feuds with
others on the site then it is fair game for these channels. The use of social
media and streaming sites to discuss the on goings of Youtubers and influencers
is completely valid as they have chosen to put their entire lives on view for
all of the public to see.

What fuels this article is the fight that occurred between Tati Westbrook and
James Charles. On May 10th 2019 Tati posted a 40-minute video about James
stating all the things he has done to upset her, these include, but are not
limited to, him promoting a competing brand to hers and sexually harassing
straight men. He then made a response to her video addressing the allegations
(Rodulfo, 2019). After these videos were released “Tea accounts”, (tea meaning
juicy gossip) took to the internet on YouTube and other social media platforms
to address the situation (Lorenz, 2019). There is no shortage of these accounts
on YouTube and other social media sites, and their sole purpose is to dive deep
into the lives of celebrities, not necessarily Hollywood actors, but
influencers. They find tweets, comments on posts, and videos, referred to as
“receipts”, and make their own videos addressing the matter and what they
believe the truth to be (Lorenz, 2019). When the feud between Tati and James
started it was a field day for tea accounts as they are both big in the beauty
world, and as the feud developed other YouTubers joined in on the fight choosing
sides, giving tea accounts more content.

Successful YouTubers have the right connections and outreach. YouTubers who have
been on the site since it came out grew their channels slowly and saw posting
videos as a fun pastime. However, now if you collaborate or start drama with the
right person you could be on your way to stardom. Some people even make fake
feuds in order for tea accounts to pick up their story and grow their audience.
It is important to know that YouTubers that are featured on these channels get
huge promotion from them as they might reach an audience they do have yet. Not
to mention sometimes YouTubers even go to these tea accounts to give them their
side of the story for more leverage (Lorenz, 2019). The fact that YouTubers go
to these tea accounts themselves indicates they know what these accounts have to
say means something. YouTubers, some quite famous, still get outshined by
Hollywood actors and other celebrities that if they can make the news through
tea accounts picking up their stories, they are here for it. “Young people are
desperate for news about influencers, a category of people the mainstream press
often ignores or patronizes. They also want that news delivered 24/7 through
social-media channels” (Lorenz, 2019). If you ask most young people who their
favourite YouTuber is, most of the time they will have an answer. Unlike
Hollywood stars, fans of YouTubers have access to what goes on every minute of
every day of their lives, and the crazy part is YouTubers are the ones who
provide this information. Whether it be on Snapchat, Instagram, Twitter or
YouTube, they lay it all out. Some even go as far as filming their entire
weddings or giving birth. If they are putting such personal information out
there for everyone to see, I do not see an issue with tea accounts relaying the
story more clearly to the public, or with more information they noticed from
another video. If it is already out there for everyone to see anyway, they are
just doing all the hard work for us so that we do not have to do the research
ourselves.

The argument can be made that when dealing with an online feud, the public
should stay out of it and let them figure themselves out privately. It is mean
or invasive to go into past videos and find out every little detail and take
matters out of proportion, capitalizing on another's potential downfall.
Depending on how serious the allegations are. I have to disagree with this side
of the argument because these YouTubers have chosen to bring their fights and
their personal lives to YouTube. They could have very easily sorted it out
privately first before coming to YouTube to vent their problems, or better yet
not come to YouTube at all. Also, if a tea account can uncover that more serious
allegations are untrue then it can clear the name of the person being accused,
or conversely can uncover who they actually are. It is also not teenagers that
are having petty feuds on the site, it is full grown adults. Take Tati for
example, in the article it says that she is 37 years old (Lorenz, 2019). Instead
of talking through her issues with James in private she chose to go to the
internet. If she gets backlash for that, or tea accounts pick up the story and
find things out she did not want them to know, that is her problem for bringing
it public in the first place.

Since YouTubers put their entire lives on the internet it is completely fine
that tea accounts look up all the elements involved in a given situation and
share what they think about it. If they choose to be on the site and upload
videos, they know that with that comes a very public lifestyle. The thing about
YouTubers that makes them so different than Hollywood actors is that the fame of
an actor can come after one movie or TV show and they are in it for life.
However, with YouTubers their climb to fame is much more gradual and they could
stop at any moment. The fact is that they do not get out sooner and as their
career develops their lives become more public. At the end of the day what is
considered “hot tea”, very juicy gossip, does not last more than a few months
anyway and the person who is receiving all the backlash is quickly back on the
rise within no time. Tea accounts are the modern day TMZ, and are how young
people get their news about the happenings of their favourite celebrities
(YouTubers). To not allow these accounts to continue what they are doing would
not only be next to impossible, but also diminish the content on YouTube as a
whole. And that’s the tea.

References:

Lorenz, T. (2019, May 16). How Tea Accounts are Fueling Influencer Feuds. *The
Atlantic*. Retrieved from
<https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2019/05/how-tea-channels-feed-youtube-feuds/589618/
>

Rodulfo, K. (2019, June 19). An Extremely Detailed Timeline of The James Charles
and Tati Westbrook Drama. *Elle*. Retrieved from
<https://www.elle.com/beauty/makeup-skin-care/a27453234/james-charles-tati-westbrook-youtube-drama-timeline/
>
