---
title: The Absurdity of Instagram's Meme Purge
lname: Yee
fname: Robyn
email: yeer5@mcmaster.ca
web: www.instagram.com/robinyeet
image-description: A male university student looking at his phone.
bio: My name is Robyn Yee and I am in my 3rd year at McMaster University. I am currently in an honours program for Multimedia and Communications.
---

I can always recite the repetitive, daily activities of my everyday morning
routine. Mind-numbing, auto-piloting activities such as brushing my teeth,
getting ready for the day, possibly eating breakfast, or scrolling through
social media. Social media is a big part of filling the void of a boring
morning. On my way to school one morning, I noticed a lack of entertainment
filling up my feed, particularly my Instagram feed. Usually there’s an abundance
of funny videos, humorous images, also known as ‘memes’. It was strange to see a
lack of memes and instead, different content taking its place. In my feed that
was the basic, and mostly boring pictures of, “*What so and so did last night*”,
or “*Feeling kinda pretty right now, might delete later xoxo*”, or the peers
posting selfies and self promotions, etc. I thought my feed was already purged
of this type of content! I sat back in my chair and thought to myself, “Why the
*heck* is my feed not filled with memes and instead, populated with things I do
not care about?”. Of course, I don’t mind what people post. They can post
whatever they want, I just prefer not to see pictures of my peers having actual
lives when I’m just looking for a source of entertainment to pass the time.
After all, everyone has their own Instagram accounts, catered to content that
they prefer to see, either through an artificial algorithm or a personal effort
to choose what you see, or what you wouldn’t like to see.

 

It is later in the day that one of my friends told me that Instagram cracked
down on hundreds of entertainment pages with over millions of followers
(collectively 30 million followers), wiping them all out in an instant. To an
average follower of these pages, it’s just a minor inconvenience. They would
think, “*Oh that’s a real shame, but I’ll just follow more pages that didn’t get
deleted.*” and move on with their day. I had the chance to witness a pre-purged
Instagram owner spam-posting on their account, begging for their data to not get
wiped, because it was their only source of income, and their livelihood. They
talked about all the networking they had done, all the money they had put into
their account and how much work it took them to get to this point. They received
unsympathetic comments that were more or less apathetic to this person’s cries
for help. About an hour later, this person’s account was also deleted and all
traces of them and ability to communicate with them were gone. It’s strange to
think that this owner was providing entertainment to millions of people
(including myself) for years and in the end of it all, received no sympathy or
assistance and was forced to start from scratch or leave the platform. Many
Instagrammers/memers resurfaced months later with only a fraction of what they
had built previously and are now attempting to rebuild the audience they once
had, but it still seems unfair to these individuals to get purged just like
that.

 

As for the reason why Instagram decided to delete memers accounts that amassed
over thirty millions of followers collectively, it is still unclear. Many think
it was due to an update to their policy changes and since these big accounts
were deleted, there was no mass following that could appeal their decisions. The
ability to unify many people and riot against Instagram’s decision to purge
these accounts were taken away as followers and memers were reminded that no one
technically owns their own Instagram account. It is because Instagram owns the
platform and thus, Instagram owns your social media account and can do what they
see fit at any time. Account holders are now reminded of the dangers that follow
in building your business solely on social media.  


The accounts that didn’t get deleted were account holders that owned and created
their own intellectual property. A lot of controversy would be stirred up if
people posting their own, original content were purged too, so Instagram made a
decision to not to touch these individuals. The routine with sharing memes is
that if you see something funny online, you will download it and repost it. Many
popular meme accounts will do this, the act of finding a funny meme and then
dispersing it to a larger audience that the funny image wouldn’t have been able
to reach without the help of a memer. While I can see why this is a major
problem due to copyrighted content, if an Instagram account holder first asks
the original content owner for permission and reposts with credit then it should
be a perfectly legal move. As an artist, I welcome bigger accounts to share my
work and expose it to a larger audience of people that I can’t reach on my own.
Sometimes this backfires and someone will repost your art. Said art goes viral,
with no real way to retrace it back to the artist. This situation happens due to
not watermarking your work, but sometimes it is an inevitable occurrence with
how the media functions today.  
  
In other words, Instagram has shown even the biggest accounts with power over
their audiences that their accounts are not their own and no matter how much of
a following they have amassed that Instagram can delete their accounts,
suffering no losses on their end. After all, Instagram uses account holders to
post content to suck other people in. Instagram doesn’t need to do their
research when they have capable users offering to do that part for free. Once
new users have created their own accounts and they’ve grown into the habit of
using social media as a part of their everyday routine, Instagram would have no
more use for the entertainment accounts since they already have the digital
audience they wanted. There are plenty more accounts just like theirs. It goes
to show that even if you make a strong social image for yourself that everyone
has grown to love and interact with your account, that it can still be taken
away with little compensation and little warning. The terms and conditions that
were agreed upon the moment you opened the application for the first time were
the rules that ensured the control Instagram will have over you from the
beginning to the end of your time *borrowing* their application. There is some
irony in how Instagram will punish users without remorse over using other
people's intellectual property when their entire platform claims ownership over
everyone else’s intellectual property and can sell their user’s information as
they see fit.

 

Resources
---------

Lorenz, T. (2018, December 27). Instagram’s Christmas Crackdown. *The Atlantic*.

 
