---
title: Our Transmogrified Printing Press
lname: Yim
fname: Emma
email: yime1@mcmaster.ca
image-description: Man reading news on a tablet
bio: Emma is a fourth-year student at McMaster. She is currently combining in multimedia, and enjoys opportunities to be creative as well as learning about media production. 
---

Once upon a time, something revolutionary happened. A man named Gutenberg engineered a device that had the ability to press ink onto sheets of paper at a rate that was, at the time, unprecedented. And in an instant the ability for mass production of books and other texts was born. With it, knowledge was able to be disseminated to populations of people who previously were unable to gain access to the texts (typically for financial purposes) and encouraged the masses to learn how to read due to the prevalence of books. Eras were created from this machine—the Reformation, Enlightenment, and even modern democracy, and humankind would never be the same. This is how the story is typically told. And although much of it is true, often times the ugliness that simultaneously erupted from the invention of this machine, is swept under the rug in favour of a more triumphalist view. Although books that offered insight into the thinking and dictations of famous philosophers empowered a new age of thinkers, other books were vehicles for slanderous ideologies that fueled prejudice within communities. The printing press opened doors for progress—and at the same time, doors for perpetuating hate. 

I believe that social media is an extreme, transmogrified version of a modern-day printing press. Although the author (Andrew Marantz) of the article _The Dark Side of Techno-Utopianism_ argues that there is more or less a one-to-one relationship between Gutenberg’s printing press and social media, I believe there are similarities but also stark contrasts that should establish social media as something much more dangerous. I see the parallels clearly when I read in the article that outlined the early days of social media giants such as Facebook, Twitter, 4chan and Reddit. On the brink of something innovate and potentially revolutionary (just like the printing press), the future entrepreneurs programmed wearing rose-tinted glasses. The Internet was still forming an identity in terms of what it could do or be, and these men took it upon themselves to help carve out more of a definition. It would be a place, a utopia, where knowledge was democratized. Where people could have a space to voice their opinions and beliefs to others who would do the same thing. This core intention is shared with Gutenberg’s technology, but while the printing press was limited in who could author texts, social media has allowed everyone to be a content creator. 

Gutenberg’s printing press (or an iteration of it) would be the distributor of Martin Luther’s _On the Jews and Their Lies_ a renowned theologian with a large following who published one of the first modern works of anti-Semitism. On Twitter anybody regardless of their reputation, current following, or credentials, has the potential to tweet something that goes viral for the right or wrong reasons and ends up reaching audiences in numbers that would challenge Luther’s. Where authoring a book used to be a sign of power and status, and a more covert way of suppressing ideas while highlighting others, now there is no such thing as suppressed knowledge (at least not within a Western context). Social media influencers also have a greater and more consistent reach to their audiences than modern-day authors. This means consistency in the kind of messaging their following aligns with (which can be positive but also negative). With the lines blurred between content creators and audiences, the ability to disseminate problematic messaging is only heightened. 

Furthermore, where an author’s name (usually a real name and not a pseudonym) is typically assigned to a publication, social media allows for anonymity only exacerbating the prevalence of harmful content as people no longer have to worry about consequences of their controversial posts if they do not want to. A perfect example of this is the platform 4chan, which hold anonymity and freedom of speech in the highest of regards but has also been the breeding ground for white supremacy ideologies and people to posting images that border on child pornography. We know that Martin Luther published anti-Semitic propaganda. But more often, we do not know who truly posted that threat to the Jewish community on Twitter or Facebook. 

Fake news during Gutenberg’s time looked much more different than it does now. When _The Dictes and Sayings of the Philosophers_ (one of the first published works), was printed, a chapter on philosophers such as Zalquinius and Tac existed. Today, there is reason to believe that these philosophers might not have even existed. Although this might have been misleading to the audiences who read this book, nothing really stemmed from this revelation. Social media, on the other hand, plays an active role in disseminating loads of misinformation that should encourage users to fact check what they read, but hardly ever gets done. And when people believe the fake news they read, there can be severe consequences. Just this past year, a YouTuber named James Charles was subject to cancel culture on the basis of “receipts” or information that turned out to be misleading. He lost millions of subscribers, and was harassed online, only to have his side revealed and people realize they might have been wrong in their interpretations. Furthermore, social media contributes to echo chambers that act to reinforce one’s beliefs, which can be particularly harmful during political elections (e.g. Facebook during the 2016 American election). Books do not contain algorithms. As much as Gutenberg would print, all of the material would be useless without a person making the choice to read it out of a whole library of other available texts. Social media dictates what library you are shown. They act on the basis of what you (or the data they have on you) would be most likely to engage with. And so, if you are a left leaning political individual that views left leaning articles and stories more, but who has friends on Facebook that are conservative, algorithmically, you are not likely to see what they post. It’s ironic that despite the vast array of information we have available at our fingertips, we are also boxed in our own ideas that closes the opportunities for growth and discussion. 

In a later topic in the course, we talk about building a better internet. Despite all of the shortcomings of the dissolved techno-utopia, we still have the ability to have an honest conversation about what needs to change. It was ideological thinking that helped to shape social media platforms, but this thinking also continues to act as an excuse for entrepreneurs and stakeholders to remain distanced from the consequences that were bound to arise. William Caxton (one of the first Gutenberg published authors) believed that anybody who would be offended from something that was printed should “blame the author, not the messenger”. Many social media entrepreneurs share this same view. But I believe there is a responsibility for those who are creating printing presses, which are as innovative as the light bulb, but as harmful as a weapon, to regulate the platforms they create that protects individuals from the harmful consequences of their creations.  

## Citations

Henry, B. (2019, May 23). James Charles Has Responded To Accusations That He Photoshopped Screenshots To Make Himself Look Better. Retrieved October 8, 2019, from https://www.buzzfeed.com/benhenry/james-charles-photoshopped-text-messages.

Marantz, A. (2019, September 23). The Dark Side of Techno-Utopianism. Retrieved October 8, 2019, from https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2019/09/30/the-dark-side-of-techno-utopianism.

Milner, R. M. (2018, November 20). The Internet Doesn’t Need Civility, It Needs Ethics. Retrieved October 8, 2019, from https://www.vice.com/amp/en_us/article/pa5gxn/the-internet-doesnt-need-civility-it-needs-ethics.



