---
title: Fake Images create Fake News
lname: Yusuf
fname: Ayo
email: yusufa4@mcmaster.ca
web: www.vsco.co/khepe/
image-description: Altered image of O. J. Simpson in comparison to the original picture
bio: A 3rd year multimedia student in the Humanities Faculty of McMaster University located in Hamilton, ON, Canada. 
---
It was June of 1994 –– and everybody was shocked about the violent murders of Nicole Brown Smith and Ron Goldman. Particularly, O. J. Simpson was the prime suspect for the murders and it was on every media outlet, including The New York Times Magazine; his mugshot was the cover, but it had been altered and darkened by both Times Magazine and Newsweek. The public argued that his mugshot was darkened as a sales tactic based on the negative stereotype attached to African Americans being criminals. Even the editor said, “ you could argue that it's racist to say that blacker is more sinister, but be that as it may...” (Carmody, 1994). The magazine chose to sell the illusion of a dark-skinned individual as a guilty violent criminal before his trial had begun. It gave the public a false representation of the case while unaware of any factual evidence before claiming he was the murderer. As a result, the O. J. Simpson trial defence team used racism as its main defence against the horrific murder claims. This paper will not state whether or not O. J. Simpson committed the murders, however, it will discuss how altered images can be used as a means to spread fake news, accomplish political agendas, used for corporate profit, and/or while for many, it is used to live up to society's standards. Regardless of the intentions of doctored photographs –– it questions the reality of the photo. More specifically, this paper will summarize and analyze The Washington Post’s *"Many people can’t tell when photos are fake. Can you?"* by writer, William Wan, and later on will acknowledge how the reliability of digital images is low.
 
 In the article, Wan begins by explaining society’s obsession with altered images and how the majority does it for positive reactions from social media and dating platforms. Later on, he proceeds to discuss how people lack the ability to spot a doctored image, leaving us not able to “separate fact from fiction.” In addition, he included research by cognitive psychologists, Sophie J. Nightingale, Kimberley A. Wade, and Derrick G. Watson from the University of Warwick in England. Their research titled, *Can people identify original and manipulated photos of real-world scenes?* concluded that out of 700 male and female participants, only 45% could spot what had been altered in an image, with an average of 60% who could guess whether or not a picture was fake. Those doctored pictures included airbrushed images of imperfections, fake background settings, added objects in images, and switched up lighting (Wan, 2017). Consequently, Nightingale suggests that image manipulation is “a bit worrying,” and later stated, “They (images) can even influence our memory of things. If we can’t tell the fake ones from the real ones, the fakes are going to be powerful, too” (Wan, 2017). She claims that there is not much that can fix people's ability to know if a picture is fake or not and advice that more research on this topic needs to be done. After explaining the result, Wan uses the Paris terrorist attack as an example of how doctored images could affect an individual and spread fake news. He explains how a Canadian Sikh was falsely accused of bombing and the death of 130 people in Paris, 2015. This was after a photoshopped image published by a Spanish newspaper went viral. The image showed the falsely accused, wearing what looked like a suicide bomb vest on front page. Additionally, Wan also speaks on the attack that happened on the London bridge a couple of months after Paris, which led to fake images of missing victims speculating the internet, and a picture of another falsely accused individual driving a silver car. He finishes his article with the hopes of more research to help fix the falsehood of photos on the internet (Wan, 2017).  
 
 As mentioned earlier, the O. J. Simpson case was a classic case of media using an altered image to feed the public fear – however, it was based on a false reality. Many media platforms today, use doctored photos to share fake news and it is very alarming! Even Wan said, “ Our susceptibility to manipulated images is especially worrying when it comes to news.” With that being said, how can we manage the amount of manipulated images going around on the internet and what are the consequences to be faced when sharing such fake news? These are questions yet to be answered by anyone because even the government uses altered photographs for political advancement. Notably, during President George W. Bush's time in office, a picture was shared while he was abroad at the USS Abraham Lincoln, it shows him giving a thumbs-up to a crowd when giving a speech about the military progress in Iraq. It also features a photoshopped banner that reads, “Mission Accomplished” about the Iraq invasion, when in fact it was a meaningless invasion with thousands of soldiers and civilians losing their lives in a war that was not necessary (BRONX DOCUMENTARY CENTER, 2003). It should be noted that the war lasted almost nine years, three years after Bush’s stay in office. The image was altered to get public support for the war and it was misleading to many citizens. As Nightingale said, “The rise of photo manipulation has consequences across almost all domains, from law enforcement and national security through to scientific publishing, politics, media, and advertising” (Wan, 2017). These consequences, which could be detrimental to anybody, even a whole civilization. Although humans cannot tell if a photo has been altered, many technologies are being created to be able to detect a manipulated picture. Be that as it may, not every person will be able to have access to such a device, if created. There will always be gullible people who will believe any image they see. To conclude, it is not fair to live in a world where the legitimacy of every photo is questioned, but it is also important to know there is a possibility of it being altered. As Wan mentioned, it is impossible and as low as 45% for a person to detect a manipulated image; which leaves it to the “law enforcement and national security through to scientific publishing, politics, media, and advertising” to help reduce fake images (Wan, 2017). 

## Resources
ALTERED IMAGES. (n.d.). Retrieved from BRONX DOCUMENTARY CENTER http://www.alteredimagesbdc.org/#/applewhite/.
ALTERED IMAGES. (n.d.). Retrieved from BRONX DOCUMENTARY CENTER
http://www.alteredimagesbdc.org/oj-simpson (image)
Carmody, D. (1994, June 25). Time Responds to Criticism Over Simpson Cover. Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/1994/06/25/us/time-responds-to-criticism-over-simpson-cover.html.
Wan, W. (2019, April 29). Many people can't tell when photos are fake. Can you? Retrieved from https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/speaking-of-science/wp/2017/07/17/many-people-cant-tell-when-photos-are-fake-can-you/.


