---
title: Reflection Analysis of Media Article by Martin Pengelly
lname: Zhang
fname: Zuyun
email:
Web:
Image-description: This photo shows the Facebook plays an important role in the social media.
Bio: I am an undergraduate communication studies student in the humanity program of the McMaster University.
---

Pengelly is clear to explain the move Zuckerberg plans to take in the efforts to protect big companies like Facebook against the threat by Sen. Elizabeth Warren to close the companies in case selected as the president. I agree with the article and the facts laid down regarding the proposed plan by the senator. Zuckerberg has a right to fight for a company that has served millions of people all over the world. In this case, as much as Elizabeth Warren claims that breaking up the tech companies will help fix the corrupt system in the society, these are companies that have positively contributed to the economy at large. 

As argued by Zuckerberg, the move by the Senator is a political move controlled by the anger and hatred people have on the tech companies. In the effort to explain her stance, Warren explained that the time has come for such companies like Amazon, Facebook, and Google given the negative impact they have had on society. Warren further explained that twenty-five years ago these companies did not exist and the society was still in order. Today, companies have become valuable to the extent that people cannot do without. In this case, the only way to promote competitive markets is by breaking up these monopolies. As reported in Medium @teamwarren, Warren clarified her stance by arguing that the presence of antitrust enforcement that is weak is what has negatively impacted not only competition by innovation as well in the tech sector. This is because venture capitalists have developed a phobia to fund new startups that can be in a better position to compete with the big tech companies already existing given the fact that it is for the big tech companies to throw them off the market. According to (Warren, 2019), this is the reason why there is a 22% decline in the funding of tech startups since the year 2012. Warren proposes to introduce legislation that will require big tech companies to be "Platform Utilities" as well as appointing regulators who will be in charge of reversing illegal and also anti-competitive tech mergers. 

However, as much as this may seem a solution to what solving the issue of the corrupt system caused by media platforms like Facebook as argued by Warren, Knowledge@Wharton (2019) has argued that breaking up big tech companies would cause more harm than creating any good. This is because these firms have a huge impact or rather power over the economy and have further bulldozed any form of competition. However, experts from Wharton have argued that Big Tech companies like Facebook have positively impacted on the lives of consumers in the sense that people can access free Google searches and even connect to other media users on Facebook at a low price. What is more, it is through such platforms that individuals can freely ship items through Amazon. As Pengelly reports, Zuckerberg believes that the move towards breaking up these companies would result in unintended consequences on the well-being of consumers. This is a fact I agree with given the fact that the presence of these media platforms in the market has helped lower product prices and services while creating a marketing platform for other upcoming firms at little or even no cost. In this case, it implies that weakening or breaking them up would not level the marketing field but further route profits back to other old incumbents (Pengelly, 2019).

As recorded by Pengelly (2019), Zuckerberg believes that Warren could have some issues with the big tech companies that have left her worried or even in anger. However, even with this, it does not imply that the solution to the issue is breaking up the companies. It is a good move that Zuckerberg is ready to legally challenge Warren given the faith and optimism that they will win the case. He says, "But look, at the end of the day, if someone's going to try to threaten something existential, you go to the mat, and you fight." In support of this argument, Hendrickson & Galston (2019) provide that social media platforms such as Facebook have created a place for activists to organize as well as rally other citizens freely. Arguably, this form of media has helped achieve the role of promoting equality, democracy as well as freedom through the process of empowering individuals to broadcast and even publish their ideas. Such matters communicated relate to the every day realities affecting every member of the society and also the need to advocate for political reforms. From this perspective, the proposal by Warren to break up these firms will deny the society a platform to channel their voice and communicate their ideas. Furthermore, the market without these companies will mean a breakdown of information and exchange of goods and services. In this case, instead of breaking up these companies, it is advisable that lawmakers can put in place regulations that will help regulate as well as classify particular contents that may be threatening to the community (Stacey, 2019). 

However, as much as this act may help solve issues that mostly arise from media. The regulation of information flow must be made through caution as failure to do this may indicate a violation of the First Amendment which advocates for rights to free speech. Factually, instead of choosing to break the big tech companies, coming up with a more explicit regulatory role to effectively mitigate possible threats caused by media platforms. This is so given the fact privacy laws protecting media users have and continue to take shape in various places all around the world. If users can be protected, then the big tech companies can be left to continue operating in the market given the fact that their benefits to the society are higher than the negative impacts (Knowledge@Wharton, 2019). In summary, I agree with the article and the facts and evidence laid down regarding the proposed plan by the senator.

  
## References

Hendrickson, C &Galston, W. (2019). Big tech threats: Making sense of the backlash against online platforms. Retrieved from: https://www.brookings.edu/research/big-tech-threats-    making-sense-of-the-backlash-against-online-platforms/ 

Knowledge@Wharton. (2019). Why Breaking Up Big Tech Could Do More Harm than Good.  Retrieved from: https://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article/why-breaking-up-big-tech-  could-do-more-harm-than-good/

Pengelly, M. (2019). Zuckerberg: I’ll go to the mat and fight’ Warren over plan to break up     Facebook. Retrieved: https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2019/oct/01/mark- zuckerberg-facebook-elizabeth-warren-big-tech

Stacey, K. (2019). Mark Zuckerberg vows to fight Warren plan to break up Big Tech. Retrieved     from:       https://www.ft.com/content/29ad3c50-e454-11e9-b112-9624ec9edc59

Warren, E. (2019). Here’s how we can break up Big Tech. Retrieved from:    https://medium.com/@teamwarren/heres-how-we-can-break-up-big-tech-9ad9e0da324c


